MISSION EDITOR FEATURES
Overview
The DCS: Supercarrier module uses the standard mission editor interface. A complete explanation may be
found in the DCS: World User Manual located in your DCS World/Docs folder. That should be your first stop
when learning to set up missions using these assets.




In this section, we will briefly highlight some key features it is important to understand when setting up a mission
with the Supercarrier.
Ship Selection and Placement
The new ship assets included with the Supercarrier module appear in the TYPE dropdown list. The new Nimitz
Class carriers and Arleigh Burke destroyer are available when the COUNTRY is set to USA. The Admiral
Kuznetsov carrier is available with the COUNTRY set to Russia.
Note that the CVN-70 Carl Vinson and CVN-74 John C. Stennis are the original carrier assets included with
DCS: World. They are still available for users who do not own the Supercarrier module.




Wind Direction




It is best to face the carrier into the wind on launch and recovery to eliminate crosswind and reduce the
airspeed required to keep aircraft airborne. The carrier’s speed should be set so that the wind over deck (ship
speed plus wind speed) is near 30 knots.
It is important to remember the ship’s course in the mission editor is its true heading while Base Recovery
Course (BRC) used in carrier operations is magnetic heading. To get the BRC, add or subtract the magnetic
variation for the map being used or simply note the BRC shown at the LSO station in the mission.
Communications and Navigation Equipment
The radio frequency and NAVAID channels are all set in the mission editor. See the first section of this guide for
a description of each system. See the specific aircraft manual for exact system operation in the air and any
restrictions that may apply while setting them up on the carrier.


Radio Frequency
The ship’s ATC radio frequency and modulation are set by typing in the desired frequency or selecting the
desired modulation (AM/FM) from the dropdown menu.
All radio functions for the carrier (i.e. Marshal, Approach, Tower, and LSO) will use this single frequency. The
channel presets for the aircraft used in the mission should be set to match.




TACAN Channel
In this example, TACAN channel and band 71X is used. The callsign is set to TDR. A morse code signal will be
audible keying out those letters for identification. This identifier will also be shown on the aircraft’s displays
where applicable.
You must also select the unit within the group the TACAN signal will originate from. This should always be the
carrier. Note that the carrier’s unit name was changed to CVN-71 to make it easier to identify in the list.




ICLS Channel
The carrier’s ICLS channel is set by adding an advanced waypoint action in the same way as TACAN.
In this example, channel 11 will be used. Compatible aircraft will receive ICLS guidance on that channel. The
originating unit is selected as CVN-71.
AI Aircraft Parking and Taxi Logic
When an AI aircraft starts or lands on a Supercarrier, there are one of 16 potential parking locations it can start
from or be routed to after landing:
• One on the stern, most aft of elevator 3
• One on the stern, center aft of elevator 3
• One on the stern, next elevator 3
• Two on elevator 3
• Four in front of elevator 1 and 2
• One between elevator 1 and 2
• Two on elevator 1
• Two on elevator 2
• Two on elevator 4




When an aircraft lands, it requests a taxi route to exit the landing area (the box). Deck control will search (by
priority order listed above) to locate an open parking location and provide a taxi route to it. What does deck
control for routing an aircraft mean? First, it determines a free location based on the maximum number of open
parking locations. For example: if the parking spot aft of the island is occupied, the next parking lot in priority
order would be selected. Next, deck control will check that the chosen parking location is suitable for the landing
aircraft type and that there are no taxi route obstructions like other “live” aircraft and static objects. Once these
are satisfied, the landing aircraft is routed to the open, unobstructed parking location.
Because of this, it is very important that mission creators do not place static objects on the deck that occupy or
block the routes to and from the parking locations. Doing this can greatly reduce the number of available
parking locations. If, however, a mission is constructed the prohibits landing aircraft from reaching a parking
location, the aircraft will be automatically removed from the game.
In a multiplayer mission, starting locations are automatically assigned to the 16 locations based on the order in
which a client joins the mission.
Static Object Placement
Several new static objects are included with the Supercarrier module that allow you to add more life to the
carrier deck, above and beyond the launch crews that are already present by default.
The new static objects are available under the headings ‘Airfield and Deck Equipment’ and ‘Personnel’. Of
course, all aircraft and other static objects included with DCS: World are compatible and may be used.




Before starting, you should depress the unit icon at the bottom of the mission editor screen. Enabling this option
will show the shape of the shape of all objects in the mission editor viewer. This allows placement of objects
with much more precision. Then, zoom in so the carrier deck is visible.




When an object is placed on the deck, it must be linked to the carrier. Select the carrier from the LINK UNIT
You may find it helpful to add additional objects by copying and pasting an object that is already linked to the
carrier, so you do not have to perform this step every time. You may do this by selecting the object, [Ctrl+C] to
copy, then [Ctrl+V] to paste.




It is important not to place static objects in locations they may interfere with flight operations so test your
mission thoroughly to find any problems.
Good hunting!
The Eagle Dynamics SA team
EAGLE DYNAMICS SA © 2020
