THE NIMITZ CLASS AIRCRAFT CARRIER
Overview
The Nimitz class aircraft carrier (CVN) is a set of ten nuclear powered aircraft carriers currently in service with
the US Navy. The general arrangement of these ships is like the previous Kitty Hawk class with a large 4.5-acre
flight deck with an island structure on the starboard side reaching nearly 20 stories tall. The angled deck used
for landing is canted approximately 14° to port and is almost 800 feet long. Four high speed aircraft elevators,
each more than 4,000 square feet, bring planes to the flight deck from the hangar below.




• Displacement: 72,916 tons light, 96,000 - 102,000 full load.
• Length: 1040 feet along the flight deck (317 meters).
• Beam: 252 feet (76.8 meters).
• Speed: 30+ knots (34.5+ miles per hour).
• Power Plant: Two nuclear reactors, four geared steam turbines, four propellers (thirteen to fifteen
years between refueling or 800,000 to 1,000,000 miles).
• Complement: 3,200 regular ship’s compliment + 2,480 Air Wing personnel.
• Defense: Four NATO Sea Sparrow, three to four 20mm Vulcan Phalanx CIWS.
• Air Wing (including legacy): 70-80 aircraft including F-14s, F/A-18s, EA-6Bs, E-2Cs, S-3A/Bs, C-2s,
SH-60Fs, HH-60Hs.

The DCS: Supercarrier module represents the Theodore Roosevelt subclass of the Nimitz carrier, often referred
to as the improved Nimitz class. The hulls available here include:
CVN-71 Theodore Roosevelt. (TR, Big Stick) Date commissioned: 25 Oct 1986
CVN-72 Abraham Lincoln. (Abe) Date commissioned: 11 Nov 1989
CVN-73 George Washington. (The Spirit of Freedom, GW, G-Dub) Date commissioned: 04 Jul 1992
Flight Deck Layout and Equipment
The enormous flight deck of a Nimitz class carrier is the core of its offensive capability. During flight operations,
it is regarded as one of the most dangerous places in the world to work.




Catapults
Four catapults are available to ‘slingshot’ aircraft off the deck and into the air. Catapults one and two are located
on the bow while catapults three and four are located on the waist. Together, on average these can launch one
aircraft every 20 seconds. The launch is initiated by personnel situated in the Integrated Catapult Control
Station (ICCS), also called the “bubble”. This is a small dome located between catapult 1 and 2 on the bow and
left of catapult 4 on the waist.
These are steam powered catapults with two cylinders running the length of each track. A piston on each
cylinder connects to a shuttle that extends out of each track. The launching aircraft taxis so the launch bar at its
nose wheel connects to the shuttle. At launch, high pressure steam is ported into the cylinders. This forces the
shuttle down the track at high speed, launching the aircraft. A water brake slows the shuttle at the end of the run
so it can be retracted for the next launch.
Jet Blast Deflectors
These heavy-duty panels are located behind each catapult to deflect high speed exhaust produced by
launching aircraft’s engines. Hydraulic cylinders raise each panel into place upward at a 45° angle. A seawater
cooling system is installed in each to prevent damage from hot engine exhaust. These are retracted when not in
use and sit flush with the deck.




Arresting Gear
Four steel arresting cables, also known as cross-deck pendants, span the landing area. The aircraft’s tailhook
connects to one of these cables on touchdown, hauling the aircraft to a stop in about 300 feet.
The cables are made of braided steel strands with a polyester core for flexibility. Each end is connected to an
arresting engine below deck via a purchase cable. The arresting engines are hydro-pneumatic systems that use
a ram and fluid within a cylinder to absorb and disperse the energy of the arrestment.
Cables are numbered one through four from back to front. Although there are four cables, the visual approach
aids are calibrated so the aircraft will catch the three wire on a well-executed approach. Landing short at the
one wire risks a ramp strike at the end of the ship. Landing long at the four wire risks missing the cables
altogether, known as a ‘bolter’.


Hangar Bay
The hangar bay is located two decks below the flight deck and spans approximately two-thirds of the total
length of the carrier. The bay is divided into three areas separated by massive sliding doors that are intended to
limit the damage in the event of a fire or explosion.
The hangar bay is used for aircraft maintenance, as well as spare parts and equipment storage.
Elevators
Four large elevators provide for movement of aircraft to and from the hangar bay and flight deck. Each can hold
two aircraft or about 150,000 lbs. of equipment.
In addition to the four main elevators, there are several small weapons elevators located around the flight deck.
Flight Deck Personnel
The DCS: Supercarrier module includes deck crew who will direct you into position on the catapults and perform
steps necessary to launch your aircraft. Additional crew members may also be placed on deck by mission
designers.
All personnel on the flight deck wear colored jerseys that indicate their role.



Yellow Shirts
These include the Plane Directors who will guide you around the deck and into
position for launch. All taxi guidance comes from these personnel.
Other yellow shirts include Flight Deck Officers, Arresting Gear Officers, Catapult
Officers (Shooters), Catapult Spotters and Aircraft Handling Officers.




Green Shirts
You will encounter these personnel during launch as Catapult and Arresting Gear
crews position the holdback bar and ensure proper attachment to the catapult
shuttle. Maintenance personnel of various specialties may also be on hand to
troubleshoot last minute problems with the aircraft.
Other green shirts include Helicopter Landing Signal Enlisted (LSE), Cargo-handling
personnel, Ground support equipment troubleshooters, Hook runners and
Photographers mates



Brown Shirts
These include Plane Captains and Line Petty Officers. Aircraft general maintenance
and servicing is performed by these personnel. They are responsible for the safe
operation of the aircraft in flight and are often referred to as ‘owning’ the aircraft.




Blue Shirts
These personnel position aircraft on the deck when they are not being taxied by the
pilot. They include Aircraft handlers (pushers, chockers, chainers, etc.), Tractor
Drivers, Messengers and Phone Talkers and Elevator Operators.
Purple Shirts
These are the Fueling personnel who are responsible for safely refueling aircraft and
equipment on deck. This is an important job due to the extreme risk fire poses to a
crowded flight deck.




Red Shirts
These are the Aviation Ordnancemen who build, test, transport, and load weapons
on the aircraft. They also test and maintain the aircraft gun systems, as well as
avionics and release equipment used to employ weapons in the air.
Crash and salvage crews and Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) personnel are
also red shirts.




White Shirts
You will encounter these personnel during launch as Final Checkers give your
aircraft a last-minute look for problems.
The Landing Signal Officers (LSO) are also white shirts. For more on this, see the
section on the LSO Station below.
Other white shirts include Safety personnel, Medical personnel, Quality Assurance
personnel and Air Transfer Officers (ATO).
Instrument Approach Equipment
The aircraft carrier is a floating airport, complete with all the equipment necessary to conduct instrument
approaches. See the section on mission editor features for information on how to set these up in a mission.


Tactical Air Navigation System (TACAN)
The TACAN system provides relative bearing and/or slant range distance to a selected TACAN station (land,
ship, or aircraft). TACAN range depends on aircraft altitude Line of Sight (LOS) to the station but can have a
maximum range of 200 miles for an airborne station and 390 miles for a surface station. Each TACAN station
has a three-letter identifier which is used to identify the beacon.
The ship’s TACAN is used primarily for determining its position while on approach or establishing a holding
pattern. The TACAN is referred to as “father” while the carrier is referred to as “mother”.


Instrument Carrier Landing System (ICLS)
US Navy and Marine Corps carrier-based aircraft are equipped with the AN/SPN-41A Instrument Carrier
Landing System (ICLS). This operates much like a traditional ILS system, but it is only operational for US
aircraft carriers.
Using the ICLS is a matter of setting up the correct aircraft carrier ICLS channel and following the localizer and
glideslope beams to within visual distance of the IFLOLS visual reference at the ship.
The azimuth transmitter is installed at the stern of the ship, slightly below the centerline of the landing area. The
elevation transmitter is located above the flight deck, aft of the island.
The ICLS is referred to as “bullseye” to differentiate it from the ACLS.


Automated Carrier Landing System (ACLS)
The AN/SPN-46 ACLS is like the ICLS in that it displays “needles” that provide approach guidance information
to the aircrew. But unlike the ICLS, the system is gyro-stabilized to provide accurate glideslope and azimuth
data regardless of deck movement in heavy seas. Up to two aircraft may be controlled by the system
simultaneously.
The ACLS has three modes for approach:
Mode I. This mode provides for an automatic, hands off approach. Command and error signals are transmitted
to the aircraft from the ACLS. The aircraft then translates them into the appropriate control actions to stay on
the proper approach path all the way to landing. (Mode 1a is a sub-mode where the pilot takes over the
approach after visual acquisition of the IFLOLS.)
Mode II. This mode is like a conventional ILS approach. Glideslope and azimuth errors are transmitted to the
aircraft and shown on a display. The pilot manually ‘flies the needles’ to stay on the proper approach path.
Mode III. This is known as a Carrier Controlled Approach (CCA). No data is transmitted directly to the aircraft.
The approach controller provides verbal azimuth and glideslope information to the pilot, who flies the approach
manually based on this guidance.
See the applicable aircraft manual for information on system operation and available modes.
Improved Fresnel Lens Optical Landing System (IFLOLS)
This device is mounted on the left side of the carrier to provide the pilot with visual glidepath information during
the final phase of the approach. The system displays a bright orange ‘ball’ that is dynamically stabilized to
compensate for ship’s pitch, roll and heave motion. The system is normally set for a 3.5° glideslope targeting
the 3-wire.




The ball appears aligned between two horizontal datum lights when the pilot is approaching on the optimum
glide path. If the ball is above the datum lights the aircraft is above the glidepath. If the ball is below the datum
lights, the aircraft is below glidepath.




Lens Assembly. The lens assembly is a vertical box that contains 12 fiber optic light cells. The aircraft’s
position on the glidepath determines which cell is visible to the pilot. The upper cells are amber in color while
the bottom two are red. If a red lens is visible, the aircraft is dangerously low.
Datum Lights. Green datum lights are mounted horizontally to the lens assembly with ten lights on each side.
The position of the ball in reference to the datum lights provides the pilot with glideslope information. If the ball
is illuminated above or below the datums, the aircraft is high or low respectively.
Cut Lights. Mounted horizontally and centered above the lens box are four green cut lights. The cut lights are
used by the LSO to communicate with the aircraft during Zip Lip (no radio) operations. As the aircraft
Waveoff Lights. Waveoff lights are mounted vertically on each side of the lens box. These red lights are
controlled by the LSO. When they are illuminated, the aircraft must immediately execute a waveoff. The LSO
will initiate a waveoff any time the deck is foul (people or equipment in the landing area) or an aircraft is not
within safe approach parameters.
See the LSO Station section for additional information on related displays and controls.


Long-Range Laser Lineup System
The Long-Range Laser Lineup System uses eye-safe, color-coded lasers to provide visual lineup information to
approaching aircraft. These low intensity lasers are projected aft of the ship and are visible out to 10 miles at
night.
The color of the laser light and rate at which they flash indicate the pilot’s position in relation to the angled
deck’s centerline.
• Steady Amber – within 0.5° of centerline
• Steady Green – 0.5 – 0.7° right of centerline
• Slow Flashing Green – 0.75 – 4.0° right of centerline
• Fast Flashing Green - 4.0 – 6.0° right of centerline
• Steady Red – 0.5 – 0.7° left of centerline
• Slow Flashing Red – 0.75 – 4.0° left of centerline
• Fast Flashing Red - 4.0 – 6.0° left of centerline



Flash




Fast F
ow Flash



Slow Flash
Fast




lash




Steady
Additional Supercarrier Module Assets
The new and upgraded features in the DCS: Supercarrier module focus on the Nimitz Class carriers, but other
naval assets have received upgrades or additions with this module. These include the all new Arleigh Burke
Class guided missile destroyer (right) and a new model for the Admiral Kuznetsov aircraft carrier (left) that was
already included with DCS: World.




Left to right: Admiral Kuznetsov CV, Nimitz Class CVN, Arleigh Burke Class DDG
