NAVIGATION
INS NAVIGATION
The inertial navigation system (INS) is the primary navigation system of the F-16C and provides accurate
attitude, navigation, and vertical and horizontal steering information. The Up-Front Controls (UFC) are the
primary interface device to the INS. In this Navigation chapter we will discuss the practical application of using
the INS for navigation purposes.


INS Alignment
The navigation system can be aligned by a variety of methods on the ground or in the air. This is started by
positioning the INS knob on the Avionics Power panel to the desired position. The INS knob is set to NAV when
the alignment is complete.




The Normal (NORM) Alignment is the primary alignment mode. The NORM alignment requires approximately
eight minutes to fully accomplish.
The Stored Heading (STOR HDG) Alignment allows for a quick alignment in 90 seconds or less in some
conditions. This can only be used if the aircraft has been set up specifically for this alignment beforehand.
An Inflight Alignment (INFLT ALIGN) places the INS in ATT mode and performs an in-flight alignment. The
pilot must hold the aircraft steady and level during this process.
In Attitude (ATT) mode, only attitude and heading information is given to the avionics.


Normal Gyrocompass (NORM) Alignment
A full INS alignment in the NORM position should be accomplished prior to every flight. This is normally started
just after engine start and avionics power-up to allow time for the full alignment to complete prior to taxi.
1. Position the INS knob to the NORM position.
This begins the INS alignment and calls up the INS page on the DED. The progress of the alignment may
be monitored from here.
Time into Alignment Alignment Status


Latitude

Longitude

System Altitude
Ground Speed
True Heading



Time into Alignment. This is the elapsed time in minutes and decimal seconds since the INS alignment
began.
Alignment Status. This is an estimate of the alignment quality. Values count down from 99 with the
following meanings:
 • 99 – Initialization
 • 90 – Valid attitude data, coarse align begins
 • 79 – Valid heading data
 • 70 – Degraded navigation state, steady RDY displayed on DED, steady ALIGN displayed on HUD
 • 60-20 – Circular error probability (CEP) multiplier compared to fully aligned state; 60 = 6.0 times
normal CEP, 20 = 2.0 times normal CEP
 • 10 – INS fully aligned, RDY flashes on DED, ALIGN flashes on HUD
 • 6 – INS fully aligned and enhanced to 0.6 times normal precision with GPS data or other techniques
Latitude. Latitude of start position.
Longitude. Longitude of start position
System Altitude. Altitude used by the fire control computer for air to ground weapons delivery
True Heading. Last known true heading or heading derived during alignment
Ground Speed. Current ground speed.
2. Enter the latitude, longitude, and altitude for the starting location.
The last known coordinates and estimate of altitude are displayed when the alignment begins, however the
data must be re-entered even if it is still correct.
If the data is accurate, use the DCS switch to highlight each line and press ENTR for each in turn. If the
data is not accurate, enter the correct data for each field with the ICP keypad.
Failure to enter the data will flag the alignment as degraded and not allow important monitoring functions to
take place. Navigation, weapons delivery and targeting pod pointing errors may also result.
The alignment will stop and start again if the data is entered later than two minutes into the alignment.
3. Monitor alignment progress and switch INS knob to NAV.
The RDY on the DED and ALIGN on the HUD will begin to flash when the alignment is complete. This
should happen in 8 minutes or less. Position the INS knob to NAV to accept the alignment.



Alignment Status




Stored Heading (STOR HDG) Alignment
A Stored Heading alignment option is available to allow a faster INS alignment in certain situations. This can be
useful for “scramble” missions or for situations when your playtime is limited.
This alignment assumes a full gyrocompass alignment was already performed before the aircraft was last shut
down and the aircraft has not been moved. The previously computed true heading is stored in the Inertial
Navigation Unit (INU), a component of the INS, and is used to give the alignment process a head start. The new
alignment should take about 90 seconds.
1. Position the INS knob to the STOR HDG position.
This begins the INS alignment and calls up the INS page on the DED. The progress of the alignment may
be monitored from here just as on a normal alignment.
Time into Alignment Alignment Status


Latitude

Longitude

System Altitude
Ground Speed
True Heading



2. Verify, but do not enter, the latitude, longitude, altitude, and true heading for the starting location.
3. Monitor alignment progress and switch INS knob to NAV.
The RDY on the DED and ALIGN on the HUD will begin to flash when the alignment is complete. This
should happen in about 90 seconds. Position the INS knob to NAV to accept the alignment.
Alignment Status




Inflight (INFLT) Alignment
It is possible to lose your INS alignment inflight due to electrical failure, battle damage or switchology errors. A
new alignment may be obtained while airborne provided the INS is functional and GPS data is available. If GPS
is not available, the inflight alignment will not complete.
1. Position the INS knob to OFF for 10 seconds.
2. Maintain straight, level and unaccelerated flight.
3. Position the INS knob to the INFLT position.
This begins the inflight INS alignment and calls up the INFLT ALIGN page on the DED. No action or data
entry is required on this page if GPS data is available. An initial heading may be entered based on
magnetic compass reading or other outside sources, but this is not required.




Initial Heading




The STBY mnemonic will replace the max G indication in the HUD, showing that coarse alignment of the
inertial platform is in progress. Horizon line, pitch ladders and compass information may be displayed but
will not be accurate.
Alignment Status




4. Maintain straight, level and unaccelerated flight for approximately one minute, until ALIGN appears
in the HUD.




Alignment Status




This indicates that coarse alignment is complete and fine alignment is in progress. Attitude information
becomes available in the HUD and ADI, and the aircraft may be maneuvered normally.
Shortly after attitude information appears, the flight path marker, steering cue, aircraft heading, and HSI
navigation data become available. Reliability of the data increases as the alignment progresses.\
5. Switch INS knob to NAV after Max-G replaces ALIGN in the HUD.
Replacement of ALIGN with Max-G shows that the alignment is complete. The mission may proceed
normally from there.
Max-G




HUD Indication
You can view your current heading on the top or bottom of the HUD, depending on the selected master mode.
The heading scale shows your current magnetic heading indicated by the central caret.
The Steering Cue shows the heading to your selected steerpoint. If you turn the aircraft to align the Flight Path
Marker with the Steering Cue, you will be flying to your steerpoint.



Flight Path Marker
Steering Cue


Steerpoint Symbol




Magnetic Heading
Horizontal Situation Display (HSD) Indication
When there is an active steerpoint, it will be displayed on the HSD as a solid circle. Other steerpoints will be
displayed as empty circles with lines connecting them all to show the route. The ownship marker shows your
aircraft’s current position.




Navigation Route Steerpoints


Current Steerpoint



Ownship Marker




Horizontal Situation Indicator (HSI) Indication
The HSI is your primary gauge to assist in navigation to steerpoints, TACAN beacons, and radio beacons.
While you will likely be using HUD symbology for most of your navigation purposes, a firm understanding of the
HSI is necessary for access to additional navigation data that is not present on the HUD or DED displays, and
in case of battle damage.
Lubber Line


Range Indicator
Course Indicator

To - From Indicator
Bearing Pointer

Course Pointer Course Deviation Indicator

Heading Bug

Aircraft Symbol
Compass Card
Course Deviation Scale
Course Set Knob
Heading Set Knob

Current Mode

Mode Selector




Compass Card. Arrayed around the periphery of the HSI, this is a compass that rotates such that the top of the
compass indicates the aircraft’s magnetic heading.
Aircraft Symbol. In the center of the gauge is the aircraft symbol that always remains static. All HSI displays
reference this symbol.
Lubber Line. This is a fixed line that runs from the aircraft symbol to the top of the gauge. This line represents
current aircraft heading in relation to the compass card.
Range Indicator. Indicating range in nautical miles, this three-place drum indicator provides slant distance from
your aircraft to the selected steerpoint or TACAN station.
Bearing Pointer. This arrow-shaped indicator moves around the outside of the compass card and points to the
current steerpoint or TACAN station. Located 180° from the Bearing Pointer head is the tail that represents the
reciprocal bearing.
Heading Set Knob. Located in the lower left portion of the gauge, when rotated, this knob allows you to set the
position of the Heading Marker on the compass card.
Heading Bug. Shown as two thick lines on the outside of the compass card, this marker can be moved around
the compass card using the Heading Set Knob. After being set, this marker rotates with the Compass Card to
provide a heading to the selected magnetic bearing.
Course Set Knob. Positioned in the lower right corner of the gauge, this knob, when rotated, allows you to set
the course numeric in the Course Selector Window and move the course pointer around the compass card.
Course Indicator. This window displays the course set using the Course Set Knob numerically in degrees.
Course Pointer. Set by the Course Set Knob, these two lines represent the set course and reciprocal course
on the compass card.
Course Deviation Indicator. This line that runs through the center area of the gauge provides an indication of
how accurately you are flying on the set course line. When the line runs through the aircraft symbol in the center
of the gauge, you are on course. If it is to either side, you need to correct your heading to place the aircraft back
on the course line.
To-From Indicator. These two triangles along the intended course line indicate the course the aircraft will fly to
or away from the selected TACAN station or steerpoint.
TACAN NAVIGATION
The Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) system is a world-wide array of omni-directional beacons with unique
frequency codes used primarily by military aircraft. Civilian aircraft use a similar system called VOR’s (VHF
omni-direction Beacon) on a different frequency range. Many VOR stations are collocated with a TACAN. These
stations broadcast both signals so they can be used by military and/or civilian aircraft. These stations are known
as “VORTACS”.
TACAN beacons can not only be set on the ground, but they can also be attached to aircraft and even ships
(aircraft carriers). TACAN serves as a useful means to quickly navigate to a defined location.
The TACAN is part of the MIDS terminal and must be activated by rotating the MIDS LVT knob on the Avionics
Power Panel to the ON position. TACAN audio tone volume is controlled on the AUDIO 2 panel.




The currently selected TACAN station is always displayed on the bottom right of the DED CNI page. You can
see station 1X is selected in this example.




Before navigating using TACAN though, you will want to do the following:
Select TACAN Station
1. To select a new station, press the T-ILS priority function button on the ICP. That displays the TACAN/ILS
page on the DED. Information on the TACAN system is displayed on the left half of the page.




2. On the ICP, toggle the DCS switch down to highlight the CHAN field. Use the ICP keypad to type in the
new channel. Press ENTR to accept the changes.
In this example, channel 25 is entered. The system has identified it as beacon GTB, a TACAN station at
Tbilisi.




3. If required, you may change the band by typing 0 (M-SEL) into the CHAN field or scratchpad and pressing
ENTR. This toggles the band between X and Y.
4. On the ICP, toggle the DCS right to cycle through the following options: REC, T/R, A/A REC, or A/A TR.
REC. The TACAN operates in receive mode only and provides bearing, course deviation, and station
identification.
T/R. The TACAN acts in a transceiver mode (send and receive) and provides bearing, range, deviation,
and station identification. This will be your most common selection.
A/A REC. TACAN operates in Air-to-Air mode and can only receive bearing, course deviation and station
identification for a TACAN-equipped aircraft.
A/A T/R. TACAN operates in Air-to-Air transceiver mode and provides bearing, range, deviation, and
station identification with a TACAN-equipped aircraft.
In most cases, you will keep the TACAN set to the T/R mode.




5. Toggle the DCS left to RTN. This will return you to the CNI page where your new TACAN channel is
displayed at the bottom right.
Navigate to Selected TACAN Station
Once a valid TACAN station has been entered on the DED, the station is within operative range, steering
information is available on the HSI.
Press the Mode selector until TCN is displayed in the Current Mode field. Operation is identical to steerpoint
navigation except the bearing pointer points to the TACAN station instead of the steerpoint.

Lubber Line


Range Indicator
Course Indicator

To - From Indicator
Bearing Pointer

Course Pointer Course Deviation Indicator

Aircraft Symbol

Course Deviation Scale
Compass Card
Heading Marker
Course Set Knob
Heading Set Knob

Current Mode


Mode Selector



Note: TACANs are considered reliable for only 130 nm, so the maximum distance between TACAN stations is
generally 260 nm.
INSTRUMENT LANDING SYSTEM NAVIGATION
The landing approach using the Instrumented Landing System (ILS) is generally used under Instrument Flight
Rules (IFR) conditions due to night or bad weather. When used, the ILS provides vertical and horizontal
steering information to help you fly down the correct glide slope and heading to a safe landing. The ILS
frequency is set using the Up-Front Controls (UFC) and ILS steering is selected on the HSI. Steering
information is then presented on the HUD, ADI and HSI instruments. The ILS provides steering for a straight in
approach.
In addition to the instrument indications, the ILS has a localizer audio signal. The ILS provides an audio cue
when flying over either the outer or inner marker beacons. You can control the audio levels on the Audio 2
control panel.
Most, but not all runways, allow landings from either direction but will depend on the wind direction. The ILS
system should be used for the appropriate landing runway as directed by ATC.
The ILS system must be activated by rotating the ILS knob on the Audio 2 Control Panel out of the OFF
position.




The ILS operates between 108.1 and 111.95 MHz. The frequency for any runway equipped for ILS may be
seen on the Mission Planner map before mission start or in-game using the F10 map view. Click any airfield
and the information will be displayed.
In the next example, we will set the system up for a landing at Vaziani runway 31, using frequency 108.75.


Select ILS Frequency
1. To select a new station, press the T-ILS priority function button on the ICP. That displays the TACAN/ILS
page on the DED. Information on the ILS system is displayed on the right half of the page.
2. On the ICP, toggle the DCS switch down to highlight the FREQ field. Use the ICP keypad to type in the
new frequency.
Press ENTR to accept the changes.
3. Then, toggle the DCS switch down to highlight the CRS field. Use the ICP keypad to type in the localizer
course.
Press ENTR to accept the changes.




In this example, we set the system up for a landing at Vaziani runway 31, using frequency 108.75. CMD STRG
is highlighted indicating the ILS signal is being received.


Navigate with ILS Glide Slope and Localizer
Once a valid ILS station has been entered, the station is within operative range, and ILS is selected as the
activate navigation mode, you will be provided steering information on the ADI and HSI to the selected station
(much like TACAN).
Selecting one of the PLS (Precision Landing System) modes on the HSI is required before ILS deviation data
(localizer and glide slope) can be displayed on the HSI, HUD, and ADI.
HSI Indications
Press the Mode Select button on the HSI until either PLS NAV or PLS TCN mode is displayed.



Manually Selected Course
Range to STPT or
TACAN

STPT or TACAN Bearing
Localizer Deviation
Indicator Course Pointer




PLS Mode Indicator




Mode Selector




Operation is identical to steerpoint navigation except the bearing pointer points to the ILS localizer instead of
the steerpoint.


ADI Indications
The ADI provides indications that show your position in relation to the glideslope.




Glideslope Localizer and Glideslope Deviation
Deviation Scale




Glideslope
Indicator
Localizer and Glide Slope Deviation. When the horizontal bar is centered on the ADI, you are flying on glide
slope. If the bar is above the center of the ADI, it indicates that you are below glide slope and you need to
increase altitude. The vertical localizer bar indicates if you are left or right of runway alignment. If the bar is right
of ADI center, fly to the right to center it, then resume localizer course. For a proper glide slope approach, you
want the two bars centered and forming a perfect cross on the ADI (aka “center the bars”).
Glide Slope Deviation Scale and Glide Slope Indicator. Located along the left side of the ADI, this fixed
scale and moving caret indicator displays the position of the glide slope in relation to the aircraft. Basically, the
caret is the glide slope. If it is high, you are low. For example: if the caret is on the bottom dot, you are above
the glide slope. The common terminology would be “you are 2 dots high”. Conversely, if the caret is on the first
dot above middle you are below the glide slope. The term would be “you are 1 dot low”. It is a general rule that if
you go more than 1 dot low or more than 2 dots high you go missed approach and try again.
Glide Slope and Localizer Warning Flags (not visible). When displayed, this indicates that there is a problem
in receiving adequate ILS glide slope or localizer signal.


HUD Indications
The HUD also shows your position in relation to the glideslope. Command Steering guidance is also provided if
CMD STRG is highlighted on the ILS DED page.




Localizer and
Glideslope Deviation Command Steering



Flightpath Marker




Command Steering Symbol. This symbol will be displayed on the HUD to guide you through the approach
when valid localizer data is received. A tic mark appears on the symbol when nearing the center of the
glideslope to indicate the pitch steering data is valid.
Localizer and Glide Slope Bars. These bars serve the same function as those on the ADI. When the
horizontal bar is centered on the Flight Path Marker (FPM), you are flying down the glide slope projected by
the ILS vertical steering component. If the bar is above the center of the FPM, it indicates that you are below
glide slope and you need to increase altitude. The vertical localizer bar indicates if you are left or right of runway
alignment. If the bar is right of FPM center, fly to the right to center it. For a proper glide slope approach, you
want the two bars centered and forming a perfect cross on the FPM (aka “center the bars”).
AUTOPILOT
The two autopilot switches allow you to set and hold pitch and roll. Any combination of switch settings may be
used.




PITCH – ALT HOLD. This maintains the aircraft at a constant altitude. The autopilot will attempt to maintain the
current altitude from when the switch is set but may not be able to capture the desired altitude if the aircraft is in
a climb or dive. An altitude within the control authority of the autopilot will be commanded. The altitude may be
changed by pressing the paddle switch, flying to a new altitude, and releasing the paddle switch.
PITCH – ATT HOLD. This maintains the aircraft’s current pitch attitude, nose up or nose down. The autopilot
will not engage if the pitch angle exceeds ±60°, however, the switch may remain engaged. The stick may be
used to change the attitude in this mode.
ROLL – HDG SEL. This causes the aircraft to fly the heading selected on the HSI. Roll commands are limited
to a 30° bank or a 20° per second roll rate to capture the desired heading. The autopilot will not engage if the
roll angle exceeds ±60°, however, the switch may remain engaged.
ROLL – ATT HOLD. This maintains the aircraft’s current roll attitude. The autopilot will not engage if the roll
angle exceeds ±60°, however, the switch may remain engaged. The stick may be used to change the attitude in
this mode.
The switches are held in place until they are returned to the OFF position or any of these situations occur:
 • air refueling door opened
 • alt flaps extended below 400 knots
 • A/P FAIL PFL
 • AoA exceeds 15°
 • DBU on
 • landing gear extended
 • low-speed warning
 • MPO switch in OVERRIDE
 • STBY GAIN PFL
 • TRIM/AP DISC switch set to DISC
Holding the paddle switch presses disengages the autopilot until the switch is released.
