HORNET NAVIGATION
Navigation systems of the Hornet includes an Inertial Navigation System (INS), Tactical Air
Navigation (TACAN), Automatic Direction Finding (ADF), and Instrumented Carrier Landing System
(ICLS). Together, these systems provide accurate navigation day or night and in all weather
conditions. The primary navigation indicator is the Horizontal Situation Indicator (HSI) which is most
often displayed on the central MPCD. A moving map can also be enabled with full-color capability on
the MPCD, but not available on either DDI. The UFC is used for navigation data entry.


Mission Practice: Hornet VFR Navigation



The primary methods of navigation are the TACAN mode which provides steering to navigation
beacons and Waypoint based navigation points created in the Mission Editor or while in the cockpit.
Both modes provide DATA pages for each TACAN station or waypoint, bearing and range to the
location, time to reach the location, and various steering aids.



INS Alignment
The navigation system can be aligned by a variety of methods on the ground or in the air. This is
started by positioning the INS Mode Select knob on the Sensor Control panel to the desired position.
The INS knob is usually set to IFA when the alignment is complete.




CV (Carrier Alignment). This is the primary alignment mode onboard an aircraft carrier.
GND (Ground Alignment). This is the primary alignment mode on an airfield.
NAV (Inertial Navigation). This operational mode is used on aircraft without Global Positioning
System (GPS) equipment installed.
IFA (Aided INS / Inflight Alignment). In Aided INS (AINS) Mode, the INS and GPS data is
integrated to provide the best navigation data. This is the primary operating mode for aircraft with
GPS. This selection also enables an Inflight Alignment mode if alignment is lost during flight.


Alignment Procedure
A full INS alignment should be accomplished prior to every flight. This is normally begun just after
engine start and avionics power-up to allow time for the full alignment to complete prior to taxi.
1. Verify the Parking Brake is set.

Releasing the parking brake before alignment is complete may result in an invalid
alignment. The alignment will need to be reinitialized.
2. INS Mode Selector Knob - GND on an airfield or CV on a carrier.

The alignment status may be monitored on the HSI page.




Alignment Type
Alignment Quality

Time into Alignment




Stored Heading Option




Alignment Type. This identifies the alignment mode being used. Possible types include
GRND (ground alignment), CV RF (carrier alignment with position datalinked from ship), CV
CBL (carrier alignment with position provided by cable from ship), CV MAN (carrier
alignment with position manually entered).
Alignment Quality. Initially, NO ATT will be displayed as the INS is calibrated for level.
After calibration, a number estimating the accuracy of the present position is displayed.
When an acceptable level has been reached, OK is displayed next to the QUAL number.
Time into Alignment. This starts to count up when the alignment begins.
Stored Heading Option. Selecting Stored Heading after the alignment begins may allow
a faster INS alignment in certain situations. This can be useful for “scramble” missions or
for situations when your play time is limited.
This alignment assumes a full gyrocompass alignment was already performed before the
aircraft was last shut down and the aircraft has not been moved. The previously computed
true heading is stored and used to give the alignment process a head start. The alignment
then progresses as with a normal alignment.
3. Monitor alignment progress and switch INS knob to IFA (with GPS) or NAV (without GPS)
when OK is displayed.
Alignment Quality




How to Navigate Using Waypoints
1. Select HSI from the SUPT DDI page

2. Select the WYPT Option Select Button

3. Use the Up and Down arrows to select waypoint as indicated between the arrows

4. Fly to the waypoint based on HSI and HUD command steering indicators

Regardless of navigation method, the HSI has the following options and indicators. Option buttons for
the main HSI include:
3 4
2

5
1


6
18


7
17



16 8



15 9


14
10


13
12 11




Figure 45. HSI Option Buttons

1. POS/XXX Option. The POS Option button determines the position keeping source.
Pressing this Option Button displays the four options along the top of the DDI with an HSI
option button to return to the main HSI page without making a change.




Figure 46. Position Keeping Source Selection

 • AINS. The inertial navigation system (aided by the GPS) is used as the
navigation source.
 • TCN. The active TACAN is used as the navigation source. The TACAN’s
position must be in the onboard TACAN database (see TCN (TACAN)
Sublevel).
 • ADC. The air data computer and attitude heading reference system (ADC
and AHRS) are used as the navigation source. This is a backup mode that is
used when the INS fails. Accuracy degrades steadily over time.
 • GPS. The GPS is used as the navigation source directly, without reference
to the INS.

2. UPDT Option. Performs a preset position update. (N/I)

3. SCL Option. This options allows selection of the range scale of the HSI. Successive
presses of this button select and then wrap ranges of 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, and 160 miles. The
selected scale is indicated right of the SCL legend.

4. MK Option. Pressing the MK option button saves a markpoint at the location of the
aircraft when the button was pressed. Up to nine markpoints can be created. After the
ninth, the first markpoint will be over-written, and so forth.

5. DATA Option. With either TCN or WYPT selected as the navigation method, pressing the
DATA button will display a sublevel with additional information about the aircraft, selected
TACAN and selected Waypoint. See DATA section below.

6. WYPT Option. When selected and box, steering information is presented regarding the
selected waypoint. See Waypoint Navigation.

7. Waypoint / Markpoint Selection. The number between the two arrows is the selected
waypoint, and the up arrow selects the next waypoint in the waypoint sequence and the
down arrow selects the previous waypoint. At the end of the waypoint sequence,
markpoints are available in sequence.

8. WPDSG Option. Pressing the WPDSG designates the current navigation point as a target
waypoint (TGT). When a waypoint is designated as a target, the WPDSG legend is removed
and the WYPT legend changes to TGT. HUD symbology also reflects the change to be a
target location.

9. SEQ # Option. When selected and boxed, all waypoints of the sequence are displayed on
the HSI and dashed lines connect them in sequence. Successive presses of this button
cycle through the sequences. The Hornet can store three sequences. See Waypoint
Navigation.

10. AUTO Option. When selected and boxed, automatic sequence steering to the next
waypoint is enabled. WYPT must be selected as the navigation method.

11. TIMEUFC Option. Selecting this option allows time selection options from the UFC. These
include SET, ET (elapsed time) and CD (count down). Upon selecting (boxing) this option
button, the UFC lists the time options to display on the HSI and HUD.
Figure 47. TIMEUFC Options on UFC

SET. Displays the date.
ET. Starts incrementing time in minutes and seconds up to 59:59. Press the UFC
ENT button to start the counter and successive presses of the ENT button will
pause and start the counter.
CD. The countdown timer starts to decrement time in minutes and seconds,
starting from 06:00. Upon selection of the CD option, pressing the ENT button
starts the timer and successive presses of the ENT button pauses and start the
counter.
ZTOD. When selected, the Zulu time of day is displayed.
LTOD. When selected, the local time of day is displayed. (N/I)
Note that ET and CD are mutually exclusive and ZTOD and LTOD are mutually
exclusive.
12. MENU Option. Displays the TAC menu page.

13. SENSORS Option. When enabled, aerial targets detected by the radar in range and
azimuth are displayed on the HSI. (Coming later in early access)

14. ACL Option. Automatic carrier landing (ACL)is selected as the navigation method. (N/I)
15. VEC Option. LINK 4 Vector is selected as the navigation method. (N/I)

16. MODE Option. Pressing the MODE option button displays sublevel options along the left
side of the HSI. These include T UP (HSI is oriented to the flight track is always pointed
towards the top of the HSI display), N UP (true north is always at the top of the display),
DCTR (de-center placed the aircraft symbol at the bottom of the display), MAP (enable or
disable moving map), and SLEW (N/I).

17. ILS Option. ICLS is selected as the navigation method. (N/I)

18. TCN Option. TACAN is selected as the navigation method. See TACAN Navigation.
Waypoint Navigation
Waypoint navigation consists of a series of navigation points to create a navigation sequence. This
allows point-to-point steering along the sequence using automatic (AUTO) sequencing. Any waypoint
can also be designated as a target point (TGT) using the WPDSG option. Additionally, up to nine
markpoints can be created that can also act as waypoints. Command heading, distance, and time to
reach the selected waypoint is provided on the HSI Waypoint Data Block and HUD.
Waypoint steering is selected by pressing the WYPT option button on the right side of the HSI. Below
are increment and decrement arrows to select the steer-to waypoint as indicated between the
arrows.
In the top right of the HSI, the bearing to, distance to and time remaining to reach the selected
waypoint are displayed in the Waypoint Data Block. Inside the compass rose, the waypoint bearing
indicator and waypoint symbol provide heading steering information.

Waypoint Data Block




Waypoint Select




Waypoint Symbol




Waypoint Bearing Pointer




Figure 48. HSI Waypoint Steering
Additional waypoint steering is provided on the HUD.




Command Heading




Waypoint Distance



Waypoint Name




Figure 49. Waypoint Steering on HUD

While in waypoint navigation steering and a waypoint selected, the WPDSG (waypoint designate)
option button on the right side of the HSI can be pressed to change the selected waypoint to a target
point. On the HUD, the target appears as a Target Designation diamond.
Command Heading




Distance to Target




Target Symbol




Figure 50. Waypoint as Target on HUD


Time on Target (TOT) Navigation
Often in combat operations, it is vital to hit your target at a precise time in order to best coordinate
with other friendly forces. Based on a Time on Target, or TOT, using Zulu time, the Hornet can
provide you guidance to reach your target at the entered TOT.
To do so, following these steps:
1. Select Horizontal Situation Indicator (HIS) page from any display and then select the DATA
 / WYPT page. Along the bottom portion of the DATA page are blank fields for the desired
time on target Zulu time, the ground speed from the initial point to the target point, and
the waypoint that will serve as the target from which the TOT will be calculated.
Time on Target Data




Figure 51. Time on Target Data Fields

2. TOT Entry. First, we will enter the desired TOT. To do so, first press the WPSEQUFC
pushbutton 1. This will then display GSPD (ground speed), TGT (target), and TOT (time on
target) in the top three Option Select Windows. Upon pressing the TOT Option Select
Button, the TOT indication on the Option Select Window will be colonized. Using the UFC
Keypad, enter the hour:minute:second for the TOT based on Zulu time. The format is
HH:MM:SS, and once you then press the ENT button on the UFC, the set TOT will then be
displayed on the DATA / WYPT page.

Note that current Zulu time is generally displayed in the bottom left corner of the HUD.
Zulu Time



Entered TOT



TOT Option Select




Set TOT




Figure 52. Time on Target Data Entry

3. GSPD Entry. Next, we will enter the airspeed in calibrated knots that the aircraft will fly
the leg between the Initial Point (waypoint before the target point) and the target point
that will also serve as the TOT point. Select GSPD from the UFC Option Select Window to
colonize it, and then enter the desired airspeed using the UFC keypad. Upon then pressing
the ENT button on the UFC, the GSPD value on the DATA / WYPT page will be filled in.
Entered GSPD




GSPD Option Select



Set GSPD




Figure 53. Ground Speed Data Entry

4. TGT Entry. The final step is to designate the waypoint that will act as the target point
from which the TOT will be calculated. Along the bottom of the DATA / WYPT page, the
waypoints that comprise the selected sequence are listed. As before, select TGT from the
UFC Option Select Window to colonize it and then use the UFC keypad to enter the number
of the desired waypoint and then press the UFC ENT button. This will then box (set) the
selected waypoint in the sequence.
Entered TGT




TGT Option Select




Set TGT




Figure 54. Target Data Entry

With all elements set for a TOT calculation, a caret will appear below the airspeed box on the HUD,
with a vertical line centered below the box. This is your early/late indication. If the caret is left of the
line, you are too slow and must speed up to meet the TOT. If however the caret is to the right of the
line, you are too fast and must slow down to meet the TOT. Ideally, you want the caret centered on
the line to meet your TOT.



On TOT Line




Early / Late Caret




Figure 55. Time on Target HUD Indication


Modifying a Waypoint
During a mission, you may find the need to modify an existing waypoint, the most common being an
adjustment of the waypoint’s elevation to match the ground elevation. To do so, select the HSI /
DATA / WYPT page and note the chain of waypoints listed at the bottom of the page that comprise
the waypoints of the selected sequence. For example: 0-1-2-3-4-5-6
By pressing pushbutton 5, the UFC Option Select Windows display POSN (position), ELEV (elevation),
GRID, and O/S (offset). To select a waypoint to modify, use the up (pushbutton 12) and down
(pushbutton 13) arrows.
 • POSN. By selecting Position, you may enter the Latitude and Longitude using the UFC
keypad.

 • ELEV. Once the Elevation option is selected, you can enter a new waypoint elevation in
either feet or meters.

 • GRID. This option lets you enter a waypoint position in MGRS coordinates. See Entering
GRID Coordinates, below.

 • O/S. This option lets you offset the waypoint by a bearing, distance, altitude, or grid. See
the next section.

When complete, press the UFC ENT button.


Offset Aimpoints
Offset aimpoints (OAPs) are used to mark locations relative to a waypoint. You can designate the
waypoint or the offset aimpoint and receive steering and employment cues relative to either.

Creating an Offset Aimpoint
To add an offset aimpoint, first select the HSI / DATA / WYPT page, then press the pushbutton
labeled UFC. The UFC waypoint options will appear:




Figure 56. WYPT UFC Options
Press the button next to “O/S”. The offset menu will appear:




Figure 57. Waypoint O/S Menu

Press the button next to “RNG”:




Figure 58. Offset Aimpoint Range Menu

Press the button next to a unit of measure, then enter the range from the waypoint to the offset
aimpoint, and press ENT.
Next, press the button next to “BRG”:
Figure 59. Offset Aimpoint Bearing Menu

Select either true or magnetic bearing, and then enter the bearing from the waypoint to the offset
aimpoint in degrees. Enter “0” for due north. Press ENT, then press the button next to “ELEV”:




Figure 60. Offset Aimpoint Elevation Menu

Select either feet or meters, then enter the elevation difference from the waypoint to the offset
aimpoint. For example, if the offset aimpoint is 25 feet lower than the waypoint, enter “-25”. Press
ENT.
You can also create an offset aimpoint based on an MGRS coordinate by pressing the button labeled
“GRID” on the UFC menu. Doing so will display the grid format on the right DDI:
Figure 61. GRID Format

See Entering GRID Coordinates for more information.
Once the offset aimpoint has been configured, the DATA page of the HSI will display the offset
aimpoint data:
OAP Data




Figure 62. Offset Aimpoint Data

Using Offset Aimpoints
When a waypoint with an offset aimpoint is selected on the HSI, both the waypoint and the offset
aimpoint are shown, and the text “OAP” appears instead of “WYPT” at PB10:
Waypoint Location




OAP Location




Figure 63. Offset Aimpoint on HSI

Boxing WPDSG (PB14) designates the waypoint but continues to display the offset aimpoint:
Figure 64. Designated Waypoint with OAP

The label for PB14 changes to “O/S”. Pressing this pushbutton designates the offset aimpoint:
Figure 65. Waypoint with OAP Designated


Adding or Deleting a Waypoint
At any time, waypoints can be added or deleted to a waypoint sequence. This is done from the HSI /
DATA / WYPT page.
 • To add a waypoint: Press pushbutton 1, WP SEQUFC, and then the INS Option Select
Button on the UFC. Use the keypad to enter the number of the waypoint to add and then
press the UFC ENT button. The new waypoint will then be added to the end of the selected
waypoint sequence. You can only add the same waypoint to a sequence once.
 • To delete a waypoint: Press pushbutton 1, WP SEQUFC, and then the DEL Option Select
Button on the UFC. Use the keypad to enter the number of the waypoint to delete and then
press the UFC ENT button. The new waypoint will then be removed from the selected
waypoint sequence.
Inserting a Waypoint
To rearrange a sequence or add a new waypoint within a sequence, the insert function can be used.
This is different than simply adding a waypoint which adds it to the end of a sequence. This can be
done from the HSI / DATA / WYPT page.
From the WYPT page, select WP SEQUFC on pushbutton 1. Then, select INS from the UFC Option
Select Window.
 • Use the UFC keypad to enter the number of the waypoint in which you wish to insert a new
waypoint to the right of in the sequence, and then press UFC ENT. You can only add the
same waypoint to a sequence once.

 • Use the UFC keypad to enter the number of the waypoint you wish to insert to the right of
the waypoint you just designed, and then press UFC ENT.

The inserted waypoint will now appear in the active waypoint sequence to the right of the waypoint
you designated.


Entering GRID Coordinates
The F/A-18 can enter waypoint or target coordinates in Military Grid Reference System (MGRS)
format. When editing grid coordinates, grid zones are shown on the right DDI, in the Square
Identification Grid Format, which is a north-up display of grid squares around your current position.
Grid Shift Option



TDC Assignment Diamond



Grid Square ID



Cursor



Ownship Symbol



Grid Zone Intersection




Figure 66. Square Identification Grid Format

Grid Shift Option. Slew the TDC over a Grid Shift Option and press the TDC, or press the
pushbutton adjacent the Grid Shift Option, to shift the grid by one square in that direction.
TDC Assignment Diamond. Shown if the TDC is assigned to this DDI.
Grid Square ID. The two-letter designator of a 100×100-km grid square.
Cursor. The target designator cursor.
Ownship Symbol. Your present location and heading.
Grid Zone Intersection. Displayed at the borders between grid zones. Shows the numeric
east/west part of a Grid Zone Designation (GZD), such as the “11” in “11S”. In the image above, the
second vertical line from right marks the border between the 11S grid zone and the 12S grid zone.
To enter a grid coordinate:
1. From the DATA/WYPT page, press the pushbutton labeled UFC (PB20).

2. On the UFC, press the Option Select Button labeled GRID. The Square Identification Grid
format shows on the right DDI.

3. Verify that TDC is assigned to the right DDI (the TDC Assignment Diamond is shown).
4. Using the TDC, slew the cursors over the appropriate grid square. You can press the
pushbuttons adjacent to each of the cardinal directions to shift in that direction. You can
also slew the TDC cursor over a cardinal direction and press the TDC cursor to shift in that
direction.

5. Once you have slewed to the grid square, press the TDC. The grid square will be
underlined. After a short pause, the MPCD will return to the WYPT display. (The old
coordinates, including the old grid square, will still be displayed at this point.)

6. Enter the six-digit easting and northing on the UFC. (If PRECISE is boxed, enter the ten-
digit easting/northing.)

7. Press the UFC ENT button. The WYPT page will be updated to reflect the new coordinates.
TACAN Navigation
The ARN-118 TACAN system provides relative bearing and/or slant range distance to a selected TACAN
station (land, ship, or aircraft). TACAN range depends on aircraft altitude Line of Sight (LOS) to the
station but can have a maximum range of 200 miles for an airborne station and 390 miles for a surface
station. Each TACAN station has a three-letter identifier which is used to identify the beacon and is
displayed on the HSI and HUD when using TCN steering.
To use TACAN steering:
1. Select TCN from the UFC

2. Press X or Y of the desired channel from the UFC Option Select Window / Button

3. Turn on the TACAN by pressing the ON/OFF button on the UFC

4. Press CLR (Clear) on the UFC keypad to clear the scratchpad

5. Using the UFC keypad, enter the desired TACAN channel and then press the ENT button on
the UFC

6. Select TCN on the HSI display




Figure 67. TACAN UFC Mode
TACAN modes from the UFC include:
 • T/R (Transmit / Receive). Computes bearing, and measures slant range from the selected
TACAN station.

 • RCV (Receive Only). Only bearing information from the selected TACAN station is
computed.

 • A/A (Air-to-Air TACAN). Computes range for up to five airborne TACAN stations.

 • X. Selects the X band option.

 • Y. Selects the Y band option.

With TACAN steering selected with a valid TACAN station channel, steering to the selected station is
provided on both the HSI and HUD as follows:




TACAN Bearing and Range
TACAN Bearing Pointer
 (T)


TACAN Steering Option TACAN Location Symbol
Button



TACAN Station Identifier




TACAN Steering Symbol
Tail




Figure 68. TACAN Steering on HSI
TACAN Command Steering




Slant Range and TACAN
Station Identifier




Figure 69. TACAN Steering on HUD


TACAN Yardstick
A very useful function of the air-to-air TACAN to find and keep formation with other aircraft is what’s
termed “yardstick”. Although the datalink combined with the SA page largely eliminates the need for
this, yardstick can still prove useful if the datalink is inoperative.
It is important to remember that TACAN yardstick will only provide range information between you
and the other aircraft.
To enable TACAN yardstick:
1. Set TACAN to A/A mode on UFC

2. Set a TACAN channel 63 channels higher than the TACAN channel of the other aircraft, or
have the other aircraft set their TACAN 63 channels above yours. One aircraft should be
between 1 and 63 X or Y and the other(s) 63 channels higher from that. Note: be careful
to avoid TACAN channels already in use by airfields and aircraft carriers and channels 68
and 69 due to datalink conflict.

Once set up, enable TCN navigation on the HSI and note that the heading needle will spin, due to the
lack of bearing information. However, you will now have a distance indication. By altering your
heading and noting the range increase or decrease, you can often determine the general heading of
the other aircraft.
Also note that TACAN yardstick can work between any aircraft with A/A TACAN, it does not need to
be only between Hornets.
DATA Option Sublevel
Upon selecting the DATA option button from the top of the HSI page, the DATA sublevel page is
displayed with further sublevels for A/C (aircraft), WYPT (waypoint), and TCN (TACAN). The HSI
pushbutton returns the MPCD/DDI to the main HSI page.


A/C (Aircraft) Sublevel

Nav Check




Bank Limit




Heading Mode

GPS Security



Latitude/Longitude
Display Mode




Warning Altitudes




Figure 70. Aircraft HSI DATA Sublevel

The center of the display shows aircraft latitude and longitude, wind speed and direction, and
magnetic variation. Below that the horizontal and vertical GPS error is displayed, as well as the
current GPS clock time.
Bank Limit. Sets the maximum bank that the autopilot will command in CPL (coupled) mode. Cycles
between NAV (maximum 30° bank) and TAC (maximum 60° bank).
GPS Security. When unboxed, the GPS receiver will use encrypted GPS signals only. When boxed,
both encrypted and unencrypted GPS signals are used. Unencrypted GPS is susceptible to spoofing.
(N/I)
Warning Altitudes. Displays the barometric or radar warning altitude. When passing through this
altitude, an aural “ALTITUDE” alert will sound. Pressing the adjacent pushbutton allows you to edit
the warning altitude on the UFC. The barometric altitude can be set up to 25,000 feet and the radar
altitude up to 5,000 feet. Setting either altitude to zero disables the alert for that setting.
Heading Mode. Cycles between magnetic north and true north. This setting affects the display of
headings on the HSI, the HUD, the radar, and many other formats. When true north is selected, a “T”
or “TRUE” appears next to any heading shown on most displays. True north is used in the northern
or southern areas of magnetic unreliability (AMU) near the north and south magnetic poles.
When using TACAN navigation in true heading mode, the onboard TACAN database is used to lookup
a station’s magnetic variation. If the TACAN station is not in the TACAN database, TACAN courses will
reference magnetic north regardless of the selected heading mode.
Magnetic heading is sensed by the aircraft; true heading is derived from magnetic heading using a
magnetic variation database. If the INS fails and the aircraft’s position is not reliably known, true
heading is not available.
LAT / LONG Option. Toggles between degrees-minutes-decimal display (DCML) and degrees-
minutes-seconds display (SEC) of latitude and longitude. If PRECISE is boxed under the WYPT page,
additional decimal values will be added.


WYPT (Waypoint) Sublevel
The following items are functional in this early access version:
LAT/LONG, MGRS,
and Elevation
Waypoint
Selection




Time on Target
Ground Speed



Set as Air-to-Air
Waypoint

Waypoint
Precise Coordinate Sequence
Mode Selection




Figure 71. Waypoint HSI DATA Sublevel

Waypoint, LAT/LONG, MGRS, and Elevation. At the top of this data block, the selected waypoint
is displayed. Below is listed the waypoint:
 • Latitude and longitude
 • MGRS coordinate termed GRID
 • Elevation in meters

PRECISE Option. Latitude and Longitude is entered as Degrees/Minutes/Hundredths (LATLN
DCML), or Degrees/Minutes/Seconds (LATLN SEC). With PRECISE unboxed, LAT / LONG is entered
either as Degrees/Minutes/Hundredths (LATLN DCML) or Degrees/Minutes/Seconds (LATLN SEC).
With PRECISE boxed, LAT / LONG is entered either as Degrees/Minutes/Ten Thousandths (LATLN
DCML) or Degrees/Minutes/Seconds/Hundredths (LATLN SEC). Actuating the LATLN XXXX option
toggles between the selection of LATLN DCML and LATLN SEC. The selected LATLN format is
reflected on all displays and UFC formats throughout the cockpit.
Air-to-Air Waypoint. Pressing pushbutton 2 sets the selected waypoint as the air-to-air waypoint
(aka Bullseye). See Air-to-Air Waypoint section.
Waypoint Selection. Pressing pushbutton 12 increments the waypoint and pressing pushbutton 13
decrements the selected waypoint. The current waypoint is displayed between pushbuttons 12 and
13 and at the top of the waypoint data block.
Ground Speed. Entered ground speed for last leg to the waypoint set as the TGT.
Waypoint Sequence Selection. A listing of the waypoints in the selected sequence (1, 2, or 3).
The selected target (TGT) waypoint is boxed.
Time on Target. The inputted time on target in reference to Zulu time.


TCN (TACAN) Sublevel

Edit TACAN
Information




TACAN Select
TACAN
Information




Figure 72. TACAN HSI DATA Sublevel

The TCN sublevel allows you to view and edit TACAN stations in the aircraft’s onboard TACAN
database. The TACAN database stores the location, elevation, and magnetic variation of nearby
TACAN stations. While the aircraft can navigate to any TACAN station, whether or not it is in the
TACAN database, having the TACAN station in the database enhances the aircraft’s ability to use
TACAN as a position source or display the TACAN on the moving map.
Up to ten TACAN stations can be stored in the onboard database. In DCS, the database is pre-loaded
with the TACANs in the current theater.
TACAN Select. Selects from one of up to ten TACAN stations in the database. Unused database
slots are initialized to “1X” with zeroized position, elevation, and magnetic variation.
TACAN Information. Displays the position, elevation, and magnetic variation for a TACAN in the
database.
Edit TACAN Information. Pressing PB5 allows the pilot to edit the selected TACAN station (or to
add a new one if an empty slot is selected). Editing options are displayed on the UFC:




TACAN Band
TACAN Channel




Edit Position



Edit Elevation




Edit Magnetic
Variation



Figure 73. Edit TACAN Information

TACAN Channel. Displays the TACAN channel. To change the TACAN channel for this database
entry, use the keypad to enter the new channel number and press ENT.
TACAN Band. Select the option select button adjacent either “X” or “Y” to change the TACAN band.
Edit Position. Select this option select button to edit the latitude and longitude of the TACAN
station. First enter the latitude using the keypad, then press ENT, then enter the longitude, then
press ENT again.
Edit Elevation. Select this option select button to edit the elevation of the TACAN station. First
select either FEET or MTRS (meters) to colonize the proper units, then use the keypad to enter the
new elevation and press ENT.
Edit Magnetic Variation. Select this option to change the TACAN station’s magnetic variation. Use
the keypad to enter the new magnetic variation and press ENT.
Automatic Direction Finder (ADF) Navigation
A third method of navigation is Automatic Direction Finder (ADF). ADF uses radionavigation based on
beacons in the 108.0 to 400.0 MHz range. Either radio in the Hornet can be tuned to the desired ADF
channel and receiving steering information for the selected beacon. However, no range information is
given. The bearing to the selected ADF beacon is displayed as a circle on the outer periphery of the
HSI compass rose.


How to Navigate Using ADF Beacons
1. Select either 1 (COMM 1) or 2 (COMM 2) from the ADF switch on the UFC

2. Rotate the channel selector of the selected ADF switch to the Manual (M)

3. Using the UFC keypad, enter the frequency of the desired ADF beacon into the UFC
Scratchpad and press ENT on the UFC

4. The selected ADF beacon should now appear on the HSI as a circle and the ADF code
will be heard (adjusted through the Volume Panel)


Note that this ADF cannot be used with most non-directional beacons (NDBs), which transmit on
frequencies between 190 and 1750 kHz. It can be used to navigate to VHF omnidirectional range
(VOR) stations, as those typically transmit on frequencies between 108 and 118 MHz.
Additional HSI Symbology
In addition to the HSI symbols described above, other symbols are present to assist in navigation.
These include:



1
2


5
11


6 7



4 12



9 3



8 10




Figure 74. Additional HSI Symbols

1. Compass Rose. 360° compass with cardinal directions. The compass rose is referenced to
aircraft track by default, to magnetic north when “N UP” is selected under the MODE
submenu, or to true north when “N UP” is selected under the MODE submenu, and TRUE
heading is selected under the DATA → AIRCRAFT submenu.

2. Lubber Line. A line marked on the compass rose that indicates aircraft heading.

3. Heading Select Marker. Heading marker on the compass rose to indicate set heading
value as indicted in the Heading Select numeric indication.

4. Course Line. Set course line through the selected TACAN station or Waypoint and rotated
to match the Selected Course numeric.

5. Aircraft Symbol. Placed in the center or de-centered in the compass rose, this indicates
the location of the aircraft.
6. Ownship True Airspeed. True airspeed of your aircraft.

7. Ownship Ground Speed. True ground speed of your aircraft.

8. Selected Heading. Heading value set using the Heading Select Switch on the MPCD.

9. Time. Time indication as selected from the TIMEUFC option button.

10. Selected Course. Course value set using the Course Select Switch on the MPCD.

11. Ground Track Pointer. Actual track of the aircraft over ground.

12. Automatic Direction Finding (ADF Symbol). When ADF is selected to a valid
frequency, this icon provides a heading cue to the selected ADF beacon. Not pictured.



Setting a Course
A course can be set using the Course Select Switch on the MPCD. The selected course value is then
displayed on the HSI in the Course Select (CSEL) field and drawn through the selected TACAN or
Waypoint. The Course Line has an arrow at the end that points in the direction of the set course.
Pressing the Course Switch left and right allows the CSEL to be rotated to match the desired course.
On the HUD, the selected course is displayed as a small arrow with two dots on either side to denote
course offset. The arrow provides a horizontal situation indication relative to the Velocity Vector. The
dots left and right of the arrow indicate 4° and 8° off course. The dots disappear when course error
is less than 1.25°.
Note that the distance to the course line is displayed the CSEL indication. This is particularly useful
when flying the correct downwind distance to the airfield or aircraft carrier of 1.1 to 1.3 nm.
Course Line




Course Line




Figure 75. Course Setting on HSI and HUD
Autopilot Relief Modes
The Hornet includes several autopilots modes that assist the pilot in flying the aircraft. The autopilot
modes are displayed by pressing the A/P button on the lower portion of the UFC. The available
autopilots modes are listed in the UFC Option Select Windows. Pressing an Option Select Button
activates an autopilot mode. The modes include:




Autopilot Mode Options,
Colon is Selected




Autopilot Enable/Disable




Figure 76. UFC Autopilot Modes

 • Attitude Hold (ATTH). The aircraft will maintain the existing pitch and roll attitude
between ±45° in pitch and ±70° in roll.

 • Heading Select (HSEL). When enabled, the aircraft will turn to and fly the heading as
set on the HSI.

 • Barometric Altitude Hold (BALT). When engaged, the aircraft will maintain the current
heading and barometric altitude between 0 and 70,000 feet.

 • Radar Altitude Hold (RALT). When engaged, the aircraft will maintain current heading
and radar altitude between 0 and 5,000 feet.
 • Coupled Hold (CPL). This mode is available when TACAN or WYPT is the active
navigation mode. When engaged, the aircraft will fly to the selected waypoint or TACAN
station. The autopilot can also fly specific courses to a waypoint or station, or automatically
fly to waypoints in a sequence.

Autopilot modes listed on the UFC are selected by pressing the Option Select Button next to the
Option Select Window of the autopilot mode. When selected, a colon is displayed next to the
autopilot name on the Option Select Window. Once selected, pressing the ON/OFF button on the UFC
enables the mode. An A/P advisory is displayed on the left DDI when an autopilot mode is engaged.
Autopilot is disengaged by pressing the Paddle Switch on the Control Stick.


Using Coupled Autopilot Mode
When in Coupled mode, the autopilot can fly to a waypoint or a TACAN station, can fly a specific
course to a waypoint or TACAN station, and can automatically fly along a sequence of waypoints.
Coupled mode only controls roll, not pitch. You can either control pitch yourself, or activate one of
the pitch modes (BARO or RALT) together with CPL.

Navigation Mode Coupled Autopilot Mode
is boxed




Selected Course and
Cross-Track Error




Auto Sequence




Figure 77. Coupled Autopilot Controls on HSI

The active sub-mode of coupled mode is displayed on either side of the ownship symbol on the HSI,
and on the right side of the HUD. “CPL TCN” is displayed when coupled to a TACAN, “CPL WYPT”
when coupled to a waypoint, “CPL SEQ1” when coupled to waypoint sequence SEQ1 with AUTO
boxed, and “CPL OAP” when coupled to an offset aimpoint.
If the autopilot has de-coupled because of something other than pilot-commanded disconnect (e.g.,
loss of TACAN signal), the HUD indicator will flash repeatedly. The flashing will continue until the
paddle switch is depressed.
When coupled mode is active, moving the stick will temporarily override it.



Bank Limiter




Figure 78. Coupled Autopilot Controls on HSI A/C Page

Bank Limiter. Cycles the bank limiter between NAV and TAC modes. In NAV mode, autopilot
commanded bank is limited to 30° when coupled. In TAC mode, the limit is 60°.

Flying Directly to a Waypoint or TACAN Station
To fly directly to a waypoint or a TACAN station (including a carrier TACAN):
1. Select the waypoint using the HSI format or tune the TACAN station using the UFC. (Verify
that the TACAN is on.)

2. Activate the appropriate navigation mode. For waypoint navigation, box WYPT (PB 11).
For TACAN navigation, box TCN (PB 5).

3. Press the AP button on the UFC to show the autopilot options.

4. Press the OSB adjacent “CPL” to activate coupled autopilot mode. A colon will appear
 (“:CPL”) to indicate that it is active.

Upon crossing the waypoint or TACAN station, the autopilot will transition to heading hold mode and
continue flying the current heading.
Overfly Option




Figure 79. Coupled Autopilot Controls on HSI WYPT Page

Overfly Option. This PB is labeled OVFLYX (where X is the current waypoint). When boxed, turn
anticipation is inhibited. The aircraft will directly overfly the next steerpoint, and turn to intercept the
outbound course only after crossing it. When boxed, the OVFLY option applies to all waypoints until
unboxed.

Flying a Course To/From a Waypoint or TACAN Station
To fly a course to or from a waypoint or TACAN, follow the steps above, while also selecting a course
using the CSEL switch or the UFC. The aircraft will turn to intercept the course (if not already
established), and then turn to the fly the course once established. The course will be flown either
inbound or outbound depending on the selected course direction. (Use the HSI to help visualize
which direction the aircraft will fly after intercepting the course.)
After crossing the waypoint or station, the autopilot will continue following the same course
outbound.

Flying Along a Sequence of Waypoints
When the autopilot is in coupled in WYPT mode, and the AUTO sequence option (PB 16) is boxed,
the navigation system will automatically activate the next waypoint in the sequence upon crossing
each waypoint. Use PB 15 to ensure the proper sequence is selected, and press PB 16 to box the
AUTO option. When the autopilot is coupled in WYPT mode, the aircraft will automatically fly to each
waypoint in the sequence.
Instrument Carrier Landing System (ICLS)
While real US Navy and Marine Corps Hornets are not equipped with Instrument Landing System
(ILS) for airfield landings, they are equipped with the Instrument Carrier Landing System (ICLS). This
operates much like a traditional ILS system, but it is only operational for US aircraft carriers.
Using the ICLS is a matter of setting up the correct aircraft carrier ICLS channel and following the
localizer and glideslope beams to within visual distance of the IFLOLS.


ICLS Channel Option
Select
UFC Scratchpad




UFC Keypad



UFC ILS Button
UFC ON/OFF Button




ILS HSI Option




Figure 80. ICLS UFC




Mission Practice: Case III Carrier Landing
Please use the following checklist for a successful ICLS approach.


How to Use ICLS
1. Select ILS from the Up-Front Control (UFC) panel. The carrier ICLS channel will
most often be listed in the mission briefing

2. Press the ON/OFF UFC button on the UFC to turn on the ICLS

3. Enter the desired carrier ICLS channel into the UFC scratchpad using the UFC
keypad and then press the ENT button

4. Select ILS on pushbutton 5 from the HSI. This will allow ICLS information to be
displayed on the HUD and DDI HUD repeater page

5. Fly to keep the vertical localizer and horizontal glideslope bars centered in the
HUD. If the localizer is off-center, fly in the direction of the bar to center it. If the
glideslope bar is above the velocity vector, you are too low. If it is below the
velocity vector, you are too high.




Glideslope Beam Bar




Localizer Beam Bar




Figure 81. ICLS HUD Indications
In the above example image, the pilot is left of the localizer (lineup) and below glideslope. Fly to
keep the two bars forming a cross in the center of the velocity vector.
