PROCEDURES
In the following sections, we will provide “How To” checklists for the primary procedures you’ll need
to understand to get started in the Hornet.


Instant Action Mission Practice: Hornet Cold and Dark and Carrier Cold and Dark




Cold Start
There are two methods you can use to start a cold and dark Hornet. The first, and easiest, is the
Auto-Start. By pressing [LWin] + [Home], the aircraft will be started automatically for you. To
cease the Auto-Start, you can press [LWin] + [End].
Being a DCS title though, the Hornet really shines when you take advantage of the detailed systems
modeling, like manually starting the aircraft. In this guide, we will skip the Pre-Flight and Upon
Entering Cockpit checks and begin with the Before Engine Start checks.




1
2




1. Set the BATTERY switch to ON and confirm both Left and Right Generators are ON. [RIGHT
CONSOLE]

2. Move and hold the fire detection switch to FIRE TEST A and wait for all the audio caution
messages to play. Once complete, wait 10 seconds and then do the same for FIRE TEST B.
Between running FIRE TEST A and FIRE TEST B, you can reset the battery switch to
rewind the fire test tape. [LEFT CONSOLE]




6




7
5




3



4




3. APU switch to ON and wait for green APU READY light. [LEFT CONSOLE]

4. Move the ENG CRANK switch to the right to start the right engine. [LEFT CONSOLE]

5. Move the right throttle from OFF to IDLE when the right engine is above 25% rpm (as
shown on IFEI). [RShift] + [Home]

6. Once right engine RPM is over 60%, rotate the BLEED AIR knob 360° clockwise, from
NORM to NORM. [RIGHT CONSOLE]

7. Test the CAUTION, WARNING and ADVISORY lights test. [RIGHT CONSOLE]

8. Turn on the power to both DDIs, MPCD and HUD. Select the FCS page on the left DDI and
the BIT page on the right DDI. [INSTRUMENT PANEL]
8 8




8




8




9. Set COMM 1 and COMM 2 radios as required for the mission.




9 9




10. Move the ENG CRANK switch to the left after confirming that the right engine has an rpm
between 63 and 70%, a TEMP between 190° and 590°, Fuel Flow between 420 and 900
PPH, a nozzle position between 73 and 84%, and an OIL pressure between 45 and 110 psi.
 [LEFT CONSOLE]
11



10




11. Move the left throttle from OFF to IDLE when left engine has reached at least 25% rpm by
pressing [RAlt] + [Home]. [THROTTLES]



12




13




12. Once the left engine has an RPM greater than 60%, rotate the INS knob to GND (ground)
or CV (carrier), depending on your parking location. [RIGHT CONSOLE]
13. Set the Radar knob to OPR (operate). [RIGHT CONSOLE]




14




14. Set the OBOGS control switch and FLOW switch to ON. [LEFT CONSOLE]




16




17




15




15. Press the FCS RESET button and monitor FCS DDI page. [LEFT CONSOLE]

16. Set the Flap switch to AUTO. [LEFT QUARTER PANEL]

17. Press Takeoff Trim button. [LEFT CONSOLE]
18. While holding up the FCS BIT switch [Y] on the right wall, press the FCS OSB on the BIT /
FCS page at the same time.




18




19. Four down test. Cycle / test the refueling probe, speed brake, launch bar, arrestor hook,
pitot heat, and set flaps to HALF. [LEFT CONSOLE, THROTTLES, LEFT QUARTER PANEL, RIGHT
QUARTER PANEL, AND RIGHT CONSOLE]

20. Left mouse click on the hand brake to release it.
19 19



20



19




19



19




21. Set your BINGO fuel level (minimum fuel to return home) by pressing the up and down
arrows on the IFEI. [LEFT INSTRUMENT PANEL]

22. Set the Standby Barometric Altimeter to airfield elevation. [RIGHT INSTRUMENT PANEL]

23. Set the Radar Altimeter to 200 feet for an airfield takeoff or 40 feet from the carrier. [RIGHT
QUARTER PANEL]

24. Uncage the standby Attitude Indicator. [RIGHT INSTRUMENT PANEL]

25. Set the Attitude Source to AUTO. [CENTER INSTRUMENT PANEL]
25



24
21


22



23




If you plan to use the Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System (JHMCS), you will need to align it now.
To do this, follow the steps in HMD Alignment under the JHMCS chapter.
Airfield Taxi
1. Whether you have completed a cold start or are starting the mission in a “hot” aircraft,
your next step will be to taxi to the runway. Slowly advance the throttles [PgUp] and use
the rudder pedals to steer left [Z] and right [X]. Reduce throttle by pressing [PgDn].
Holding down the Noses Wheel Steering (NWS) button, you can enable NWS HI mode
enabled tighter taxi turns. Press [W] to apply wheel brakes.

2. Set the left DDI to the checklist page and the right DDI to the FCS page.

3. At the hold short before entering the active runway:


4 5




4. Arm the ejection seat. [RIGHT CONSOLE]

5. Close the canopy if you have not already done so. [LCtrl] + [C]

6. Set the left DDI to the HUD page. [LEFT INSTRUMENT PANEL]
Airfield Takeoff
Instant Action Mission Practice: Hornet Takeoff



1. Align the aircraft down the center of the runway and roll forward to align the nosewheel
down the runway.

2. Set left DDI to the HUD page.

3. Advance to throttles to afterburner.

4. Use nosewheel steering to maintain a straight track down the runway.




7




6



6




5. At nosewheel rotation speed, hold the control stick back until 6° to 8° nose high attitude
 (water line above the horizon line on the HUD)

6. Raise the landing gear and set the FLAP switch to AUTO once positive climb is established.

7. Switch the right DDI to air-to-air radar.
Airfield VFR Landing
Being a carrier-capable aircraft, the Hornet can land on both “the boat” and airfields. Both landing
patterns are quite similar. For this guide though, we will just review the procedure for landing at an
airfield under Visual Flight Rules (VFR) conditions.


Mission Practice: Hornet Airfield VFR Landing
SPEEDBRAKE RETRACT LANDING GEAR DOWN, FLAPS FULL
250 knots



SPEEDBRAKE (as required)



ON SPEED AOA Break



ENTER
Armament switch OFF


LANDING CHECK LIST
TOUCHDOWN
Throttles idle
WAVEOFF
Mil Power (Max if required)
Retract gear and flaps only
after safe climb is established
FINAL APPROACH
Maintain on speed AOA




BASE LEG
Maintain on speed AOA




Figure 43. Airfield Landing Pattern
Call up the air-to-air radar page on your right DDI and HUD repeater on your left DDI.
Enter Navigation master mode and set the Master Arm Switch to SAFE on the [LEFT INSTRUMENT
PANEL] and approach at 350 knots and 800 feet Above Ground Level (AGL) along the heading of the
landing runway and offset yourself slightly away from your first turn into the pattern.



Master Mode Buttons




Master Arm Switch




Five to ten seconds after your wingtip passes the end of the runway (the greater the time, the more
time you must establish your on-speed AoA on the downwind leg), turn into the downwind leg of the
landing pattern. Generally, pull 1% of your airspeed in g. For example: 350 knots would equal 3.5 g.
Roll out on a reciprocal landing heading and an altitude of 600 feet AGL.
Your lateral offset from the runway should be about 1.2 miles.
Once your airspeed is below 250 knots, lower your landing gear and place your flaps in the FULL
down position. [LEFT QUARTER PANEL]
Landing Gear Handle




Flap Switch




Allow your airspeed to decay until you reach your on-speed angle of attack as indicated left of the
HUD on the Angle of Attack Indexer. This will equate to 8.1° of angle of attack which will appear as
the yellow circle on the AoA Indexer. On the HUD, the Velocity Vector should be centered in the AoA
“E” Bracket. Establish your on-speed AoA at 600 feet AGL.
You will need to trim the aircraft to 8.1° AoA to be hands-free.
AoA Bracket Velocity Vector




AoA Indexer Lights




Turn into the landing base leg when your wing tip aligns with the runway threshold while maintaining
on-speed AoA. Your bank angle should be 30° and the HUD velocity vector should be just below the
HUD horizon line. You will need to slightly increase throttle to maintain this AoA. Continue the on-
speed descending turn until you are aligned with runway landing heading (a good idea is to set your
course line to the landing airfield along the landing runway heading).
Maintain on-speed AoA with the HUD velocity vector placed 500 feet past the runway threshold. Use
your throttle to maintain a 3° flight path.
At touchdown, reduce the throttles to idle and use small rudder corrections to stay aligned down the
runway roll-out.
Aircraft Carrier Taxi
Mission Practice: Carrier Cold and Dark



After completing start up on the carrier, your next task will be to taxi to the catapult for takeoff. The
primary difference between an airfield start-up and an aircraft carrier startup will be placing the INS
switch in the NORM CVN position for alignment.
Set the left DDI to the checklist page and the right DDI to the FCS page.




6


4


16




7




1




Your complete checklist prior to taxi includes:
1. Arm the ejection seat
2. Check that nosewheel steering is on
3. No warning lights
4. Hook is up
5. Flaps are set to HALF
6. Trim set to total aircraft weight
7. Wings match wing fold handle
8. Oxygen on
9. Brake off
10. Launch bar up
11. Anti-skid off
12. Master Arm off
13. From the MPCD, select WTPT and cycle the waypoint to 1.
14. Countermeasures off
15. Radar altimeter to 40 feet
16. Canopy closed
17. Master external light switch aft




15
2




13

6
12


4
10


3
5

7
11

1
9




Taxi to the directed catapult using small power inputs while using nosewheel steering in high gain
[S]. Once behind the Jet Blast Defector (JBD) of the catapult you will launch from, spread the wings
using the wing fold handle on the right vertical panel. To do so, right mouse button click on the
handle until at the SPREAD setting. Then, with the mouse cursor over the handle, rotate forward on
the mouse wheel.
Slowly advance the throttles [PgUp] and use the rudder pedals to steer left [Z] and right [X].
Reduce throttle by pressing [PgDn]. Holding down the Noses Wheel Steering (NWS) button, you can
enable NWS HI mode [S] enabled tighter taxi turns. Press [W] to apply wheel brakes.

Wing Fold Handle




Launch Bar Switch




Slowly move forward of the JBD and align your nosewheel along the catapult track. You can best
align yourself by using either the [F2] external view or taxi to place the shuttle directly left or right of
your shoulder when launching from catapult 1 or 2. Once the nosewheel is directly behind the
catapult shuttle, lower the launch bar. Next, press [U] and this will auto-connect the launch bar to
the catapult shuttle.


Jet Blast Deflector




Launch Bar




Catapult Shuttle




Once hooked up, takeoff stab position with the trim hat based on total aircraft weight. This weight
can be seen on the CHECKLIST page. Using the TRIM HAT, set your stabs to takeoff trim based on:
 • Below 44,000 gross weight = stab trim 16° (MIL or burners)
 • 45,000 to 48,000 gross weight = stab trim 17° (MIL or burners)
 • 49,000 and above = stab trim 19° (Burners required)
Total Weight



Stab Setting




With stabs set to total takeoff weight, you will be ready for launch.
Aircraft Carrier Launch
Mission Practice: Carrier Takeoff



1. Set throttles to military power and wipe the controls by moving control stick in a full circle
and then push full forward and back. Then, push both full left and right rudder.

2. Increase throttle to 100% afterburner and move hand off stick.

3. The catapult will then launch you and place you at flyaway trim.

4. After positive climb rate has been established, raise the landing gear [G] and set flaps to
AUTO [F].

5. If launching from catapult 1 or 2 (bow catapults), perform a clearing turn to the right and
then proceed parallel along the carrier BRC for 7 miles at no more than 500 feet / 350
knots. If launching from catapult 3 or 4 (waist catapults), perform the clearing turn to the
left.




6. Set right DDI to the A/A attack radar display.
Case 1 Carrier Recovery
Landing on aircraft carrier in Case I conditions is much like an airfield in VFR conditions. A Case I
condition is defined as visibility of at least 5 miles and clouds no lower than 5,000 feet. In other
words, good weather, day light conditions.


Instant Action Mission Practice: Case I Carrier Landing



Call up the air-to-air radar page on your right DDI and HUD repeater on your left DDI.
Enter Navigation master mode and set the Master Arm Switch to SAFE on the [LEFT INSTRUMENT
PANEL]. Lower the arrestor hook by pressing [H] and set HUD altitude to radar.




Master Mode Buttons




Master Arm Switch




Entry into the Case I pattern would either be done from a port holding pattern (5 nm diameter circle
at 1.5 to 5 thousand feet over the carrier) or a direct approach into the upwind leg. In this guide, we
will discuss a direct approach.
Note: For a Case 1 recovery, neither TACAN nor ICLS are required. Those will be discussed in Case II
and III recoveries.
Approach the carrier from astern at 800 feet and 350 KIAS. Pass starboard of the carrier, and just
close enough that you can look down to the left and visually spot the carrier deck to make sure the
deck is not foul.




At no more than 1.5 nm after passing the bow of the carrier, initiate a level turn to the left.




Generally, pull 1% of your airspeed in g. For example: 350 knots would equal 3.5 g. Roll out on a
reciprocal landing heading and an altitude of 600 feet AGL. If your entry speed is above 350 KIAS,
you may wish to extend the airbrake until your airspeed decays to 250 KIAS. Once below 150 KIAS,
lower the landing gear [G] and extend flaps to FULL [LCtrl] + [F].
Your lateral course distance from the carrier in the downwind leg should be 1.3 to 1.4 nm. See the
TACAN Navigation chapter.
Landing Gear Handle




Flap Switch




Course Distance




With an established altitude of 600 feet, keep letting airspeed fall until around 145 KIAS and carefully
increase throttle such that you capture the on-speed AoA as indicated by the E-Bracket on the HUD
and the Angle of Attack Indexer lights to the left of the HUD frame.
E-Bracket




AoA Indexer Lights




Maintain on-speed AoA and 600 feet until the round-down on the stern of the carrier is visible and
forms a straight line.




In the first 90 degrees of the second turn, maintain on-speed AoA and use throttle to adjust your
decent rate between 100 and 200 feet per minute with a roll angel of 27° to 30°. A good way to
visualize this is to place the velocity vector just below the horizon line on the HUD such that just the
vertical post and right “wing” touch the horizon line.
During this portion of the turn, don’t peak at the carrier, instead fly by the instruments.
As you pass the second 90 degrees of the second turn, allow your vertical velocity to increase to 500
feet per minute and visually acquire the carrier and Improved Fresnel Lens Optical Landing System
(IFLOLS).
Upon rolling out on final approach to the carrier, all direction is now dictated by the IFLOLS.
An optical landing system (OLS) provides the pilot with glidepath information during the final phase
of the approach. The first OLS utilized a gyroscopically controlled concave mirror. This mirror was
vertically mounted between two horizontal sets of green datum lights. An orange source light was
shown in the mirror and would appear as a yellowish orange “ball” to the pilot.
The position of the ball relative to the datum lights would indicate the relative position of the aircraft
to the desired glidepath. If the ball was above the datum lights (a high ball), the aircraft was above
the glidepath; conversely, a low ball indicated the aircraft was below glidepath. When the ball and
the datum lights were aligned horizontally, the aircraft was on glidepath.
The IFLOLS consists of a lens assembly, “cut” lights, waveoff lights, and datum lights. The IFLOLS
has three modes of stabilization: Line, Inertial, and Point. Line Stabilization compensates for the
ship’s pitch and roll. Inertial Stabilization operates the same as Line Stabilization, but also
compensates for the up and down motion (heave) of the flight deck. Both modes stabilize the
glideslope to infinity. The point stabilization mode fixes the glideslope around a point 2500 feet aft of
the lens. The system is normally set for a 3.5° glideslope targeting the 3-wire. The IFLOLS comes in
both the shore-based and ship-based variants.
 • Lens Assembly. The lens assembly is a box that contains 12 vertical cells through which
fiber optic light is projected. The upper cells are amber in color while the bottom two are
red. The aircraft’s position on the glidepath determines which cell is visible to the pilot. The
visible cell, compared to the horizontal green datum lights, indicate the aircraft position
relative to the glideslope (i.e., above, on, or below the optimum glideslope). If a red lens is
visible, the aircraft is dangerously low.

 • Cut Lights. Mounted horizontally and centered above the lens box are four green cut
lights. The cut lights are used by the LSO to communicate with the aircraft during Zip Lip
or Emissions Controlled (EMCON) operations. As the aircraft approaches the groove, the
LSO will momentarily illuminate the cut lights to indicate a “Roger ball” call. Subsequent
illumination of the cut lights indicates a call to add power. Zip Lip is normally used during
day Case I fleet operations to minimize radio transmissions. EMCON is a condition where all
electronic emissions are minimized.

 • Waveoff Lights. Waveoff lights are mounted vertically on each side of the lens box.
These red lights are controlled by the LSO. When they are illuminated, the aircraft must
immediately execute a waveoff. The LSO will initiate a waveoff any time the deck is foul
 (people or equipment in the landing area) or an aircraft is not within safe approach
parameters. “Bingo” is signaled by alternating waveoff and cut lights.

 • Datum Lights. Green datum lights are mounted horizontally to the lens assembly with ten
lights on each side. The position of the ball in reference to the datum lights provides the
pilot with glideslope information. If the ball is illuminated above or below the datums, the
aircraft is high or low respectively

Upon the main gears contacting the landing area, immediately move the throttles to full power in
case the arrestor hook misses the wires. This will allow the aircraft enough power to get airborne
again.
If the “trap” is successful, retard the throttles to idle, raise the arrestor hook [H], set flaps to AUTO
[F] and taxi out of the landing area.
