
# AIRCRAFT HISTORY

The history of the F-16 is closely linked to the history of fly-by-wire. Fly-by-wire substitutes the traditional
hydromechanical link between pilot and control surfaces for a computer. When the pilot moves the stick left, they
are essentially telling the fly-by-wire computer that they wish to bank left; it’s then up to the computer to decide
how to translate that command into a series of control surface deflections. Fly-by-wire opened the door to aircraft
designed with relaxed static stability: designs that would be too unstable for a human pilot to fly manually, but
whose instability translated to improved maneuverability.
The F-16’s pioneering fly-by-wire system is owed to a man named Harry Hillaker. In the 1940s, fresh out of
college, Hillaker joined Consolidated Aircraft as an aircraft designer. There Hillaker contributed to the designs of
the B-36 Peacemaker and the F-111, among others, and in doing so, he began to lament a trend among Air Force
aircraft: Each new generation was becoming bigger, heavier, and less efficient. By the mid-1960s, Hillaker started
contemplating a small, agile fighter that forsook contemporary Air Force dogma.
While Hillaker pondered his new fighter, NASA was breaking ground
on fly-by-wire technology. Fly-by-wire was first used on the Gemini
2 capsule, and ultimately made its way to the Apollo lunar landers,
where it impressed astronaut Neil Armstrong. Following the
cancellation of the Apollo program, Armstrong was promoted to
Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics at NASA. Wanting
to further investigate fly-by-wire technology, Armstrong acquired a
lunar lander computer, and had it installed in an F-8 Crusader, to
be used as a testbed for airborne fly-by-wire. This F-8, designated
NASA 802, flew in May of 1972, thus becoming the United States’s
first fly-by-wire aircraft. NASA 802 caught the notice of Hillaker,
who noted the drastic improvement in control responsiveness, a full
2.5 times that of an unmodified F-8.
                                                                                      NASA 802 (NASA)


The Fighter Mafia
                             Few fighter pilots are as well-known (or notorious) as Col. John Boyd. Following a
                             1953 tour in Korea as an F-86 Sabre pilot, Boyd attended the USAF Fighter Weapons
                             School, where he quickly became a star pupil. His outstanding performance earned
                             him an invite to return as an instructor, and through the 1960s, Boyd worked as
                             teacher and tactician, conceiving of and developing his energy-maneuverability
                             theory. E-M theory was an entirely novel analysis of aircraft combat, with a
                             quantifiable underpinning contributed by mathematician Thomas Christie. Boyd and
                             Christie crunched the numbers using Air Force computers, and the results led Boyd
                             to the conclusion that a fighter with maximal thrust-to-weight ratio and minimal
                             energy loss in turns would hold a competitive advantage over contemporary designs,
                             which emphasized bigger, heavier engines and airframes.
                            In the late 1960s, in an effort to push his ideas, Boyd put together a team of
    Col. John Boyd (US)     likeminded experts: The “Fighter Mafia.” Among them was Harry Hillaker of
                            Consolidated Aircraft, which had since been sold to General Dynamics. The Fighter
Mafia worked from inside the Air Force to advance the concept of a lightweight fighter.
In 1967, Boyd was recalled to USAF headquarters to apply his E-M theory to the flagging F-X project. The F-X
project was to be the next generation USAF fighter aircraft, but it had stalled amidst doubts among USAF generals
that it had become too large and costly. Boyd’s analyses helped convince the Air Force to reduce the weight and
complexity of the F-X. The lighter F-X proposal would be nicknamed the F-X “Blue Bird,” but Boyd and the Fighter
Mafia continued to push for an even smaller, even more nimble air superiority fighter, which they called the F-X
“Red Bird.”
The Fighter Mafia was a diverse group of fighter pilots and engineers, but they all had in common a desire to see
the Air Force adopt a lightweight fighter design. This put them squarely at odds with the Air Force brass, most of
whom leaned heavily on the upcoming “Blue Bird.” The F-X
program was seen as a sort of rebirth for the USAF fighter
inventory, at this time comprised mostly of F-111s and F-4s. The
F-111 had by then evolved into something ungainly and sluggish,
and the F-4 was thought of as the Navy’s bird, something the Air
Force adopted only afterwards. The F-X represented a prideful Air
Force future, embracing its “higher, faster, further” motto, and
many in the USAF command ranks were emotionally invested in
an aircraft that embodied those words.
The F-X program continued undeterred. In 1970, the Air Force
                                                                                     F-15 Eagle (USAF)
announced that McDonnell-Douglas was selected to develop the
F-X, now designated the F-15 Eagle.


Lightweight Fighter Program
Towards the end of the 1960s, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, David Packard (of Hewlett-Packard) had become
concerned that the upcoming USAF and Navy frontline fighters — the F-15 and the F-14 Tomcat — represented
future budget problems for the Armed Forces. The Fighter Mafia had continued to push the USAF towards their
“Red Bird” concept, now also known as the F-XX. Their studies also helped convince manufacturers such as
General Dynamics and Northrop to start investigating potential lightweight fighter designs. In late 1970, as the
F-14 continued to experience budget and maintenance issues, Lockheed-Martin took the initiative and delivered
to Packard an unsolicited proposal for a lightweight fighter. Other companies in the industry quickly followed suit,
including General Dynamics.
                           Deputy SecDef Packard had been looking to implement a new “fly-before-you-buy”
                           purchasing policy and had become recently enamored of competitive prototyping. He
                           saw the new LWF proposals to advance his ideas. The Air Force was still lukewarm to
                           the idea of a lightweight fighter, until the Fighter Mafia coined the “high/low mix” —
                           the concept that the F-15 and F-XX would complement each other, occupying the high-
                           cost and low-cost brackets of Air Force spending, respectively. The high/low mix idea
                           reframed the LWF as an ally to the F-15, and lifted resistance among Air Force brass.
                           Packard’s Lightweight Fighter RFP produced five proposals, among which two were
                           selected for funding: The General Dynamics Model 401, and the Northrop P-600. Each
                           company would be granted funding to build demonstrator aircraft, which would be
  David Packard (DoD)      tested against each other in a series of trials — the fingerprint of Deputy SecD Packard’s
                           influence. The P-600 would be redesignated the YF-17, and the Model 401 would
                           become the YF-16.


Air Combat Fighter Competition
At General Dynamics, Robert. H Widmer became the chief engineer on the YF-16 project. At Harry Hillaker’s
insistence, the YF-16 was to incorporate a production fly-by-wire system — but as the engineers were still
uncertain if fly-by-wire was feasible, the YF-16 program was designed with a contingency. Should it be necessary,
the YF-16’s wings could be shifted aftward to restore the airframe’s static stability, and the analog fly-by-wire
system was designed to be easily removable and replaced with traditional flight controls.
                                               Along with its revolutionary control system, the YF-16 became a
                                               testbed for other innovations: The aircraft would be capable of 9-g
                                               maneuvers, and the seat was reclined 30° to improve the pilot’s g-
                                               tolerance. The reclined seat, and concern about the pilot’s ability to
                                               manipulate systems during high-g maneuvering, guided the
                                               development of its HOTAS, which put more capability on the stick
                                               and throttle than prior aircraft. The small cockpit necessitated that
                                               the stick be moved to the side, so that it wouldn’t obscure cockpit
                                               instruments.
                                                In December 1973, the completed YF-16 prototype was unveiled at
                                                Edwards Air Force Flight Test Center, where it began flight trials. Its
                                                first flight on January 20, 1974 was unintended: During a fast-taxi
           YF-16 Rollout, 1973 (GD)
                                                run, a fault in the fly-by-wire system created a worsening control
                                                problem that forced the test pilot to lift off for a trip around the
pattern. The actual, intended first flight occurred a few weeks later in February, following repairs of the prototype.
The Air Force had set the initial stakes of the LWF competition by committing to purchasing 650 aircraft of
whichever model won. But by early 1974, interest in the Lightweight Fighter competition had grown, and as word
spread to NATO allies, other countries began committing to purchases of the winner as well. In response to the
heightened interest, the LWF competition was expanded into a new program called Air Combat Fighter (ACF).
The ACF program specified a multirole lightweight fighter aircraft and required that any purchase of the winning
model must also be in parallel to a purchase of F-15s. This requirement shut down the last of the resistance to
the LWF program within the Air Force.
The expanded ACF program brought in foreign competitors, among them Dassault-Breguet, SEPECAT, and Saab.
Ultimately, after flying 330 trial sorties spanning 417 flight hours, test pilots unanimously favored the YF-16. So
it was January 13, 1975 when Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas announced that General Dynamics had
won the ACF competition, and with it, hundreds of domestic and foreign orders for the F-16.


The F-16A and B
Through 1974 and 1975, General Dynamics developed the YF-16
into the F-16, making numerous structural modifications. What was
originally envisioned as Boyd’s lightweight fighter now had to
become a multirole aircraft, per the ACF program requirements. The
radome was enlarged to fit the AN/APG-68 radar, and two more
pylons were added. These and other changes ultimately netted a
25% weight increase.
So much was the Air Force’s desire to keep the new fighter from
impinging on the F-15’s glory, that Air Force brass prohibited the F-
16 from carrying AIM-7 Sparrows, the medium-range BVR missile of
the day. (This requirement would impel one of the Fighter Mafia,
General Mike Loh, to order the design of a medium-range missile                First production F-16A Block 10 (USAF)
that could be mounted on AIM-9 Sidewinder stations — a project
that would ultimately produce the AIM-120 AMRAAM.)
In late 1975, the first F-16A FSD (full-scale development) was manufactured, and on October 20, 1978, the first
production model rolled off the assembly line. The production F-16A first flew in November of that year, and the
Air Force received its first delivery in January. The F-16 entered operational service with the 388th Tactical Fighter
Squadron at Hill AFB, Utah in 1979. A year later, the F-16 was given the official moniker of “Fighting Falcon” —
but of course, its pilots called it the “Viper.”
In all, 475 F-16As and Bs (dual-seat variant) were produced. The model variants spanned Blocks 1, 5, 10, 15,
and 20. Many Block 20 F-16As have since undergone the Mid-Life Upgrade (MLU), becoming functionally
equivalent to F-16Cs.


The F-16C and D
On June 12, 1987, the Block 30 F-16 was introduced, designated the F-16C and D. Block 30 was the result of the
Alternative Fighter Engine (AFE) program, a project to allow the F-16 to be configured with either the existing
Pratt & Whitney F100-PW-220 engine, or with the General Electric F110-GE-100 as an alternative. The original
plan was for the F-16 to have a common engine bay, allowing any aircraft to swap between the two engines.
This idea was scrapped when it was discovered that the GE engine required widening the inlet. Due to the
airframe change, beginning with Block 30, the blocks were split in two: Block 30, 40 and 50 were equipped with
a General Electric engine; and Block 32, 42, and 52 were equipped with a Pratt & Whitney engine.
Along with the diversity of engine choices, the Block 30/32 F-16C received an upgraded mission computer with
more storage, an AN/ALE-47 countermeasures dispenser, and the capability to employ AGM-45 Shrike and AIM-
120 AMRAAM missiles.
Block 30/32 F-16Cs would be delivered to the USAF Thunderbirds demonstration squadron in 1986 and 1987;
these aircraft are today some of the oldest still-operating F-16s. Other Block 30/32s were delivered to the U.S.
Navy, re-designated the F-16N, and used as stripped-down aggressor aircraft in USN air combat training.
                                              The Block 40/42 model, commonly called the “Night Falcon,” was
                                              debuted in December 1988. As implied by its nickname, the Night
                                              Falcon introduced a suite of night attack technologies, including the
                                              LANTIRN navigation/terrain-following radar and targeting pods. The
                                              aircraft also got an upgraded fire control radar and RWR, a wide-
                                              angle holographic HUD capable of displaying FLIR video, and an
                                              improved mission computer. The aircraft got an exterior makeover
                                              as well: The hull was treated with radar-absorbent materials, and
                                              the iconic gold-tinted canopy debuted. Despite all these
     F-16C (MSGT Michael Ammons, USAF)
                                              improvements, the USAF was in general disappointed with the
                                              increased weight and decreased performance of the Night Falcon
                                              series.
January 1991 saw the start of Operation Desert Storm in Iraq, and with it, the F-16’s first combat deployment
for the USAF. Following the Gulf War, on December 27, 1992, LTC Gary North of 33 rd Tactical Fighter Squadron
earned the first combat kill in a USAF F-16 after shooting down a Syrian MiG-25 that violated airspace restrictions.
The MiG-25 was also the first aircraft destroyed by an AIM-120 AMRAAM.
In October of 1991, Block 50/52 rolled out, restoring the Viper’s performance and maneuverability. The aircraft
got an up-rated engine (the F110-GE-129 or the F100-PW-229), and with it a 20% increase in thrust. The radar
was again upgraded, a secure modem-based datalink (SMDL) was added, and the Block 40’s holographic HUD
was replaced with the original Block 30 HUD. Some Block 50 F-16Cs were configured to carry the HARM Targeting
System (HTS) pod; these SEAD aircraft were designated the F-16CJ and DJ.
The F-16C continues to see improvements and upgrades to keep it in step with technological innovations. Between
2003 and 2010, the Air Force’s Common Configuration Implementation Program (CCIP) modernized and
standardized the avionics and capabilities across the fleet of Block 40 and Block 50 F-16Cs. The FCC was
upgraded, the MFDs were replaced with new color displays, support for JHMCS and MIDS-based datalink was
added, and the IFF was modernized. F-16CJ and DJ SEAD models that underwent modernization through this
program were redesignated the F-16CM or DM.
Today, while the USAF no longer purchases F-16s, it still operates a fleet of over 1,000 active-duty F-16Cs and
Ds. F-16s have served in virtually every U.S. air combat action since Operation Desert Storm, and F-16s are
scheduled to continue to remain in service until 2025, when they will be replaced with the F-35A Lightning II.
Aside from the United States, twenty-six other countries have purchased or leased F-16s, and all but one (Italy)
continue to fly them as an integral part of their air forces. After purchasing General Dynamics, Lockheed-Martin
continues to improve on the F-16 for foreign customers. The United Arab Emirates funded development of the F-
16E and F models (Block 60), and many other countries have pledged to purchase the upcoming F-16V (Block
70/72). The F-16V is expected to be delivered to buyers starting in 2023.




                      F-16 from the 66th AGRS taking off from Nellis AFB (SRA Dylan Murakami, USAF)
WEAPONS & MUNITIONS
M61A1 Vulcan 20mm Cannon
The F-16 is equipped with an internal M61 Vulcan six-barreled
rotary cannon. The M61 can employ M50- or PGU-series
20x102mm projectiles at 6,000 rounds per minute and is effective
against both air and surface targets. PGU-series rounds provide
increased range and decreased time of flight compared to M50-
series ammunition. The ammunition drum carries 510 rounds, of
which six different types can be chosen for loading:
M56 HEI. High-Explosive Incendiary rounds. HEI rounds have
both explosive and incendiary effects, making them effective
                                                                                A1C Kimberly Barrera (USAF)
against aircraft, light vehicles, and personnel.
M56/M242 HEI-T. High-Explosive Incendiary rounds with Tracer mix. M242 tracer rounds are substituted for
HEI rounds at regular intervals. The tracer rounds glow brightly when fired, allowing the pilot to visually see the
ballistic path of the fired projectiles.
M53 API. Armor-Piercing Incendiary rounds. Armor-piercing rounds are made from solid steel with a combined
incendiary effect, making them capable of penetrating armored vehicles. However, they have no explosive effects
upon impact, which makes them less effective against personnel.
M55/M220 TP. Target Practice rounds. TP rounds are inert with only kinetic effects upon impact. TP mix always
contains M220 tracer rounds at regular intervals.
PGU-28A/B SAPHEI. Semi-Armor-Piercing High-Explosive Incendiary rounds. These rounds have both
incendiary/explosive effects and armor-piercing capability. The rounds are constructed such that the incendiary
and explosive effects are triggered after penetration of the armor. SAPHEI rounds are effective against a wide
range of vehicles but are not generally effective against personnel.
PGU-27A/B TP. Target Practice rounds. TP rounds are inert with only kinetic effects upon impact. TP mix always
contains PGU-30A/B tracer rounds at regular intervals.


AIM-9 Sidewinder
The AIM-9 Sidewinder is an infrared-guided (heat-seeking) short-
range air-to-air missile. It first entered service in 1956 and has
since become one of the most successful missiles in the West. Its
longevity is thanks to its versatility and continued improvement
over multiple generations.
The AIM-9 uses an array of up to five scanning infrared sensors,
cooled by an internal argon bottle (L and M models). The
Sidewinder has a maximum speed of over Mach 2.5 and a
maximum range of around 10 to 20 miles, depending on the
variant. Minimum range is around 3,000 feet.
                                                                               SSgt Darnell T. Cannady (USAF)
A single AIM-9 can be mounted on any of the F-16C’s air-to-air
stations.
AIM-9L Sidewinder. The “Lima” model was the first all-aspect Sidewinder fielded in 1977, meaning it no longer
required the target to present a rear profile. The AIM-9L earned its first kill when it struck a Libyan Su-22, after
being fired from an F-14 Tomcat, in the infamous Gulf of Sidra engagement of 1981.
AIM-9M Sidewinder. The “Mike” model introduced in 1982 improved on the Guidance Control Section (GCS).
Susceptibility to flares was reduced, and background discrimination was improved, resulting in a greater chance
of target acquisition. The rocket motor’s smoke signature was reduced, making the missile less likely to be seen.
AIM-9X Sidewinder. The “X-ray” model introduced in 2003 is the latest iteration of the Sidewinder. The 9X
adds high-angle off-boresight (HOB) capability and the ability to slave the seeker head to a helmet-mounted
sight, such as the JHMCS. The missile’s maneuverability was boosted with all-axis thrust-vectoring capability.
These changes allow the pilot to simply “point their head and shoot” in nearly any direction, greatly increasing
reaction time and lethality in air-to-air combat, even when in a defensive position. The infrared sensor was
replaced with focal-plane arrays (FPAs) and counter-countermeasures capability was further improved. Electronic
fuzing was added to reduce minimum range.
CAP-9M. Captive variant of the AIM-9M. The captive variant has the same size, weight, and drag characteristics
as the AIM-9M, for training effectiveness. It also contains an integrated infrared sensor and will provide audio
and visual guidance cues to the pilot, but it does not have a rocket motor and cannot be fired from the aircraft.


AIM-120 AMRAAM
The AIM-120 AMRAAM (Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air
Missile) is an active radar-homing, medium-range air-to-air missile.
First introduced in 1982, the AMRAAM was intended to replace the
semi-active radar homing AIM-7 Sparrow, which was the medium-
range BVR missile in the U.S. inventory at the time.
The AIM-120 uses both command guidance and radar homing to
reach its target. The AIM-120’s integral radar has a comparatively
short range and relies on steering signals transmitted automatically
from the launching aircraft via a radio datalink. The AMRAAM has
a maximum speed around Mach 4 and a maximum range of 30 to
40 miles.                                                                      SSgt Sheila deVera (USAF)

AIM-120B AMRAAM. The B model was fielded in 1994 with improved guidance over the A-model.
AIM-120C AMRAAM. The C variant was fielded in 1996 and featured a slightly larger rocket motor, improved
guidance, electronic counter-countermeasures (ECCM), and re-designed fins for carriage within the internal
weapon bays of the F-22.


AGM-88 HARM
The AGM-88 HARM (High-speed Anti-Radiation Missile) is a passive
radar homing air-to-ground missile used in the Suppression of
Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD) role. The HARM has a radar receiver
and processor that detects and identifies signals from enemy
surface radars. When launched, it can guide to the target by
homing on its specific radar emissions. The missile also has an
inertial guidance system to provide mid-course guidance prior to
detection of the radar signal (or if the signal is lost).
The AGM-88 has a maximum speed of Mach 1.84 and an
operational range of around 80 nautical miles. The missile can be
employed using several different engagement profiles that can be               SSgt Scott Stewart (USAF)
selected prior to launch. It uses a laser proximity fuze for
detonation to increase its area of weapons effects.
AGM-88C. This mid-1980s variant incorporates field-reprogrammable software and improved guidance and
fuzing.
AGM-65 Maverick
The AGM-65 Maverick is a medium-range air-to-ground missile
designed for the close air support role. The AGM-65 family contains
a diverse set of variants and guidance systems, including infrared,
electro-optical, and laser guidance.
The AGM-65 has a maximum range of around 13 nautical miles. A
single Maverick can be mounted to an LAU-117 rack, or up to 3 can
be carried on an LAU-88 rack.
AGM-65D Maverick. The D model contains an imaging infrared
sensor and guidance system. The sensor can locate and track
targets during daylight and at night, in clear or restricted-visibility         SSgt Glenn B. Lindsey (USAF)
weather conditions. It contains a 125-pound shaped-charge
warhead.
AGM-65G Maverick. The G model has the same guidance system as the D model, but with a larger 300-pound
penetrating warhead, making it more effective against hardened targets.
AGM-65H Maverick. The H model uses a digital CCD sensor, making it effective in daylight only. The H model
is capable of forced correlation and does not require a target centroid to track. It contains a 125-pound shaped-
charge warhead.
AGM-65K Maverick. The K model has the same guidance system as the H model, but with a larger 300-pound
penetrating warhead.


Mark 80-Series General-Purpose Bombs
The Mark 80-series of general-purpose bombs is a series of
unguided bombs dating back to the Vietnam War. The bombs come
in nominal weights of 500, 1,000, and 2,000 pounds, and can be
fitted with a variety of nose and tail fuzes or precision guidance
kits.
The Mark 80-series bombs can be fitted to any air-to-ground pylon.
The Mk-82 can also be mounted to a triple ejector rack (the TER-
9A) in pairs or triples.
Mk-82. A 500-pound, general-purpose bomb.
                                                                                 SSgt Randy Mallard (USAF)
Mk-82 Snakeye. A Mk-82 with Mk15 retarding petals that extend
after release. The petals reduce the bomb’s downrange speed after
release, allowing aircraft to perform low-level straight-through deliveries at lower altitudes without risk of frag
damage.
Mk-82 AIR. A Mk-82 with a BSU-49/B Air Inflatable Retarder (AIR). The AIR is a ballute that expands after
release, performing the same retarding function as the Mk15. The BSU-49B is a newer technology and is more
effective than the Mk15, making the bomb safe to use at higher speeds than the Snakeyes.
Mk-84. A 2,000-pound, general-purpose bomb.
Mk-84 AIR. A Mk-84 with a BSU-50 Air Inflatable Retarder (AIR). The Mk-84 AIR is available as a 2,000-poound
general purpose bomb and a 2,000-pound inert training munition variant.
BDU-50 Training Munitions
The BDU-50 is an inert, releasable training munition with the same
mass and shape as the Mk-82 500-pound bomb but lacks a
warhead.
The BDU-50 can be mounted directly to any air-to-ground pylon,
or up to three can be mounted on a TER-9A triple ejector rack.
BDU-50LD. Simulates the low-drag or “slick” version of the Mk-
82.
BDU-50HD. Simulates the high-drag, ballute-equipped Mk-82
AIR.                                                                     SSgt Fernando Serna (USAF)
BDU-50LGB. Simulates the GBU-12, a Mk-82 equipped with a
Paveway II laser-guided bomb kit.


BDU-33 Training Munitions
The BDU-33 is an inert, releasable training munition with a ballistic
flight profile that simulates the Mk-82 500-pound bomb. Upon
impact, the BDU-33 releases a smoke cloud that can be used to
identify the impact point.
The BDU-33 can be loaded in sets of three on the TER-9A triple
ejector rack.




                                                                        SSgt James R. Ferguson (USAF)

CBU-87 Combined Effects Munition
The CBU-87 Combined Effects Munition is an unguided cluster
bomb that was developed in 1986. Each bomb contains an SUU-
65/B canister and 202 BLU-97/B submunitions. These have both
fragmentation and incendiary effects and are effective against
vehicles and personnel.
After being released, the CBU-87 begins to spin at a pre-set speed.
It falls to a preprogrammed burst altitude, at which point the
canister separates and the submunitions are dispersed.
The CBU-87 can be mounted directly to any air-to-ground pylon,
or up to three can be mounted on a TER-9A triple ejector rack.
                                                                           SrA Edward Braly (USAF)
CBU-97 Sensor-Fuzed Weapon
The CBU-97 Sensor-Fuzed Weapon is an unguided cluster bomb
containing target-discriminating submunitions. Each bomb contains
a SUU-66/B canister and 10 BLU-108 submunitions. When the
bomb approaches its preprogrammed burst altitude, the canister
opens and the submunitions are released. The submunitions deploy
parachutes at preprogrammed intervals to increase lateral spacing.
Once the submunitions reach the burst altitude, the parachute is
separated, and a rocket motor spins the submunition and stops its
descent. Each submunition releases four “Skeets,” which are
ejected in four different directions.
                                                                                       Cindy Farmer (US)
The Skeets have ground-facing laser and infrared sensors, both of
which are used to detect the presence of a vehicle. When a vehicle
is detected, the Skeet detonates, firing an explosively formed projectile (EFP) downward toward the vehicle. The
EFP usually strikes the radiative part of the vehicle (usually the engine) as detected by the Skeet’s infrared sensor
and penetrates its armor, using pure kinetic energy to produce lethal effects.
If a vehicle is not detected, they will self-destruct before reaching the ground. This helps reduce collateral
casualties associated with the use of cluster munitions.
The CBU-97 can be mounted directly to any air-to-ground pylon, or up to three can be mounted on a TER-9A
triple ejector rack.


Paveway II Laser-Guided Bombs
The Paveway II is a series of laser-guided bombs based on
conventional general-purpose bombs. The guidance kit consists of
a laser detector and processor in the front and a set of steering
fins in the back. The bomb detects and tracks reflected laser energy
off a target. The laser designation can come from the launching
aircraft, another aircraft (“buddy lasing”), or from a laser-capable
ground unit such as a JTAC.
The Paveway II series was introduced in the early 1970s to replace
the first-generation Paveway series of laser-guided bombs. The
Paveway II improved sensor reliability and added extendible rear
fins to extend glide range. The Paveway II series uses “bang-bang”              SSgt Glenn B. Lindsey (USAF)
control (where the fins can only deflect fully in either direction),
limiting its maximum range and forcing it to follow a sinusoidal path to the target.
The Paveway II series of weapons can be mounted on any air-to-ground pylon. The GBU-12 can be mounted in
pairs using a TER-9A triple ejector rack.
GBU-12. Mk-82 500-pound conventional bomb equipped with a Paveway II laser-guidance kit.
GBU-10. Mk-84 2,000-pound conventional bomb equipped with a Paveway II laser-guidance kit.
Paveway III Laser-Guided Bombs
The Paveway III is an improved guidance kit over the earlier
Paveway II, for 2,000-pound class bombs. The upgrades include
new, larger control surfaces that provide greater aerodynamic
efficiency, a larger seeker field-of-regard, improved proportional
guidance logic for flying shaped trajectories, and terminal impact
options for optimizing weapon effects.
The Paveway III enables strike aircraft to perform low-level laser-
guided bomb attacks from a wide variety of ranges and altitudes
by utilizing the greater flight efficiency and trajectory options                   USAF
provided by the kit.
The Paveway III can be mounted on any air-to-ground pylon.
GBU-24A/B. BLU-109 2,000-pound hardened penetration bomb equipped with a Paveway III laser-guidance
kit.


Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM)
JDAM is an inertial and GPS guidance kit that can be mounted to a
general-purpose bomb, enabling it to attack a pinpoint target based
on coordinates downloaded from the aircraft. The JDAM’s precision
is not degraded by weather and the bomb is completely fire-and-
forget; however, the JDAM cannot be re-targeted after launch, nor
can it engage moving vehicles.
JDAM development began in 1992 from a proposal for an adverse-
weather precision-guided munition. The proposal was created in
response to degraded laser-guided bomb performance during
Operation Desert Storm. The first JDAM kits were delivered to the
U.S. military in 1997, and the first employment was from a B-2          SMSgt Edward E. Snyder (USAF)
during Operation Allied Force in 1999.
The GBU-38 and GBU-31 can be mounted on any air-to-ground pylon. The GBU-38 can be mounted in pairs using
a BRU-57 bomb rack.
GBU-38. Mk-82 500-pound conventional bomb equipped with JDAM guidance kit.
GBU-31(V)1/B. Mk-84 2,000-pound conventional bomb equipped with JDAM guidance kit.
GBU-31(V)3/B. BLU-109 2,000-pound hardened penetration bomb equipped with JDAM guidance kit.
AGM-154 Joint Stand-Off Weapon (JSOW)
JSOW is an inertially-aided glide bomb with exceptional glide range
due to its folding wings. Like JDAM, JSOW can attack pinpoint
targets using pre-designated GPS coordinates. The JSOW’s
precision is not degraded by weather and the bomb is completely
fire-and-forget; however, the JSOW cannot be re-targeted after
launch, nor can it engage moving vehicles.
Range is dependent on launch parameters, especially the altitude
and speed of the aircraft at release.
The AGM-154A can be mounted on any air-to-ground pylon or
mounted in pairs using a BRU-57 bomb rack.                                 TSgt Cary Humphries (USAF)
AGM-154A. The AGM-154A variant was consists of 145 BLU-97/B
combined effects submunitions, identical to those used in the CBU-87 and CBU-103.


Wind-Corrected Munitions Dispenser (WCMD)
WCMD (pronounced “wick-mid”) is a precision guidance kit for the
CBU-87 and CBU-97 cluster weapons. The tail kit includes an
integrated INS which is initialized from the aircraft’s onboard GPS
position just before release. The guidance system can be
programmed with the winds aloft to enhance accuracy, giving it as
low as an 85-foot circular error probable (CEP).
The CBU-103 and CBU-105 can be mounted on any air-to-ground
pylon or mounted in pairs using a BRU-57 bomb rack.
CBU-103. CBU-87 Combined Effects Munition (CEM) cluster bomb
equipped with WCMD guidance kit.                                          SrA Jonathan E. Ramos (USAF)
CBU-105. CBU-97 Sensor-Fuzed Weapon (SFW) cluster bomb
equipped with WCMD guidance kit.


2.75-inch Unguided Rockets
The Hydra 70 family of 2.75-inch unguided rockets may be
equipped with a variety of warhead types and fuzes, which can be
loaded onto any air-to-ground pylon using 7-tube LAU-68 or LAU-
131 launchers or 19-tube LAU-3 launchers. The following warhead
variants are available in the DCS F-16C.
M151 HE. High-explosive warhead with fragmentation effects.
Effective against personnel and light vehicles.
M156 WP. White phosphorous warhead that creates a smoke
effect on impact. Used for marking ground targets.
Mk5 HEAT. High-explosive anti-tank warhead with both
fragmentation and armor piercing effects. Effective against                 BrokenSphere (CC-BY-SA)
personnel and most vehicles.
Mk61 Practice. Training rocket with an inert warhead.
WTU-1/B Practice. Training rocket with an inert warhead.
External Fuel Tanks
External fuel tanks carry additional fuel to increase the F-16’s range
and combat radius and can be refueled during air-to-air refueling.
Like most munitions, the fuel tanks are capable of being jettisoned
if necessary.
370-gallon external wing tank. The 370-gallon wing tank adds
approximately 2,500 pounds of fuel. It can be carried on pylons 4
and 6 under each wing.
300-gallon external centerline tank. The 300-gallon centerline
tank adds approximately 2,000 pounds of fuel. It can only be
carried on pylon 5 under the fuselage.                                      SMSgt Edward E. Snyder (USAF)



Targeting/Sensor Pods
Externally mounted targeting pods can be equipped to the left and right “chin” hardpoints on either side of the
intake. These targeting systems provide additional capabilities for detecting, acquiring, and engaging enemy
forces such as ground vehicles and air defenses from outside the visual range of the pilot, and with greater
accuracy and fidelity than the air-to-ground modes of the fire control radar.
AN/AAQ-28 Litening II. The AN/AAQ-28 Litening II is an
electro-optical and infrared targeting pod that can be attached to
the right chin hardpoint on the F-16C. It includes a steerable
camera with a powerful magnification range for detecting targets
at long distances during the day, and a steerable forward looking
infrared (FLIR) sensor for detecting targets during the day as well
as night. The Litening pod also includes a laser
rangefinder/designator for illuminating targets with laser energy
and a laser spot tracker for detecting laser designations of other
friendly forces on or over the battlefield.
(See Litening II Targeting Pod for more information.)                       Litening Targeting Pod (USAF)

AN/ASQ-213 HARM Targeting System (HTS). The HARM
Targeting System is an electronic detection and geolocation sensor
that is exclusively designed for the F-16C when performing
Suppression of Enemy Air Defense (SEAD) missions. The HTS pod
detects and classifies hostile air defense radar emissions and uses
signals triangulation to precisely determine the location of threat
radar systems on the battlefield. When a threat radar is detected,
the HTS pod can then handoff the radar location to the AGM-88
HARM missiles for engagement, even threat radars that are well
outside the forward search cone of the HARM missiles themselves.
While the HTS pod is not required to employ the AGM-88 HARM                 HARM Targeting System (USAF)
missile, it does enable the targeting of threat radars more
efficiently. The HTS pod also dramatically increases the pilot’s situational awareness of the threat radar
environment in the surrounding airspace and allows the pilot to make critical decisions regarding which threats
must be avoided and which threats must be engaged to accomplish their mission.
(See HARM Targeting System for more information.)
Electronic Countermeasure (ECM) Pods
Electronic Countermeasure pods can be mounted to the centerline
station under the fuselage or stations 3 or 7 under the wings. These
defensive systems provide an additional layer of protection against
radar threats such as surface-to-air missile (SAM) batteries.
Depending on the sophistication and range of the radar system that
is attempting to acquire and track the aircraft, ECM pods can be
used to deny, degrade or delay an attack so that the pilot can
escape the engagement envelope of the threat system, evade
incoming weapons, or gain additional time to execute their mission
before being forced to take evasive maneuvers..                           ALQ-131 (Northrop Grumman)

AN/ALQ-131. The ALQ-131 is one of the most proliferated self-protection aircraft-mounted ECM systems to
date. The system can employ both barrage (“noise”) jamming as well as deception jamming to threat radar
systems across multiple frequency bands.
AN/ALQ-184. The ALQ-184 was developed in the 1980’s as an upgrade to the 1970’s-era ALQ-119. The ALQ-
184 uses the same pod as the ALQ-119 but features higher jamming power output, lower response time to threat
radar signals, and digital microprocessors to increase its capability against threat radar systems.
AN/ALQ-184 Long. The “Long” version of the ALQ-184 includes additional modules to provide protection
against additional radar frequency bands.
(See Electronic Countermeasures for more information.)


AN/ASQ-T50 Tactical Combat Training System (TCTS) Pod
The AN/ASQ-T50 is a Tactical Combat Training System device. It
incorporates a sensor platform and datalink transceiver, allowing it
to record and transmit real-time aircraft telemetry to monitoring
stations. TCTS pods are used during training exercises to monitor
and record aircraft positions for many purposes, including
debriefing analysis.
The TCTS pod is captive and cannot be released. It can be mounted
to either outboard underwing pylon, or either wingtip station.


                                                                                      USAF


MXU-648 Travel Pod
The MXU-648 is a travel pod, used to transport equipment or the
pilot’s belongings when the aircraft is repositioned. The MXU-648
has a maximum load capacity of 300 pounds, and an internal
volume of 4.75 cubic feet.
The MXU-648 can be mounted on any air-to-ground pylon.




                                                                          SrA Theodore J. Koniares (USAF)
COCKPIT OVERVIEW
The F-16’s cockpit layout, avionics, and fire control systems are optimized for operation by a single pilot. Critical
controls that are needed for aerial combat are located on the Hands-On Controls (Side Stick Controller and
Throttle) to provide rapid and seamless control of the radar and weapons during maneuvering flight when moving
one’s arms and hands under various G forces may be difficult.
Essential information is displayed on the Heads-Up Display (HUD), the two Multi-Function Displays (MFD), and
the Data Entry Display (DED). Panels that contain functions that are not typically needed after start-up are
concentrated on the right console, with mission-related equipment or functions that may be used throughout the
flight are concentrated on the left console for use by the throttle hand.




                                        Instrument Panel




               Left Auxiliary Console
                                                                                        Right Auxiliary Console




      Left Console
                                                                                                            Right Console



                                                            Ejection Seat Controls


                                                           Hands-On Controls




It is important to have a general understanding of where the various controls
are located. To help locate items more easily, the cockpit has been delineated                       1
into five primary areas: Left Console, the Left Auxiliary Console, the
Instrument Panel, the Right Auxiliary Console, and the Right
Console.
Each text box above may be selected to jump to a more detailed description
of that instrument panel or console, to include the Hands-On Controls and
Ejection Seat Controls. Selecting the image of the instrument panel or
console will return the manual back to this page.
Throughout this manual, a cockpit diagram (as shown at right) may be used
to identify specific cockpit components that are used to perform procedures
such as start-up, takeoff, navigation, or landing. The component location that
is applicable to the step within the procedure will be marked with the
corresponding number of the checklist or procedure item to assist the player
in rapidly locating it. In the example to the right, the Heads-Up Display (HUD)
is marked as step 1.
Instrument Panel

                           Heads-Up Display (HUD)


                                   AoA Indexer                                      AR Status/NWS Indicator

     Threat Warning Indicator/Control Panel                                            Integrated Control Panel (ICP)

                                                                                            Data Entry Display (DED)
           Left Eyebrow Lights
                                                                                            Standby Attitude Indicator (SAI)

                                                                                                   Fuel Flow Indicator

                                                                                                        Right Eyebrow Lights
         Left Multi-Function Display (MFD)
                                                                                         Right Multi-Function Display (MFD)

      Miscellaneous (MISC) Panel                                                                       Engine Instruments



                         Airspeed/Mach Indicator                        Altimeter

                         Angle of Attack (AoA) Indicator                Vertical Velocity Indicator (VVI)

                         Attitude Direction Indicator (ADI)             FUEL QTY SEL Panel

             Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicator (EHSI)


Each text box above may be selected to jump to a more detailed description of that individual instrument or
panel. Selecting the image of the instrument or panel will return the manual back to this page.
The Heads-Up Display (HUD), Integrated Control Panel (ICP), Data Entry Display (DED), and Multi-Function
Displays (MFD) are described in dedicated sections following the Hands-On Controls (HOTAS).
The Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicator (EHSI) is described in the Navigation chapter.
The Threat Warning Indicator/Control Panel is described in the Defensive Systems chapter.


AoA Indexer
The Angle-of-Attack Indexer consists of three lights, which are
                                                                                                   1. Dimming Lever
duplicated from the AoA Indicator on the center instrument panel.
When landing, the pilot should maintain between 11° and 13° of                                     2. High AoA Indicator Light
AoA. Note that the AoA Indexer lights are always on, regardless of
whether the gear is down or not.                                                                   3. Optimal AoA Indicator Light
1.   Dimming Lever. Rotating the lever downward dims the
     indicator lights.                                                                             4. Low AoA Indicator Light

2.   High AoA Indicator Light. Aircraft angle-of-attack is greater
     than 14° or greater. Aircraft is in an energy depleting, greater
     than optimal, angle-of-attack.
3.   Optimal AoA Indicator Light. Aircraft angle-of-attack is between 11.1° and 13.9°. Aircraft is on-speed
     with optimal angle-of-attack.
4.   Low AoA Indicator Light. Aircraft angle-of-attack is 11° or less. Aircraft is in an energy gaining, less than
     optimal, angle-of-attack.
AR Status/NWS Indicator
1.   Dimming Lever. Rotating the lever downward dims the indicator
                                                                                   1. Dimming Lever
     lights.
2.   RDY Indicator Light. Indicates the aerial refueling door is open         2. RDY Indicator Light
     and ready.
3.   AR/NWS Indicator Light. When in the air, indicates that the           3. AR/NWS Indicator Light
     refueling boom is latched. When on the ground and illuminated,
     indicates that the nosewheel steering is enabled and controlled          4. DISC Indicator Light
     using the rudder pedals.
4.   DISC Indicator Light. Indicates when the refueling boom has
     disconnected. After a 3-second delay, the system will automatically
     recycle to ready.


Left Eyebrow Lights
1.   MASTER CAUTION Button.
     The       MASTER       CAUTION
     pushbutton light will illuminate       1. MASTER CAUTION Button
     anytime the Caution Light Panel
     indicates a malfunction or
     specific condition has occurred.
     It can be reset by pressing it.
2.   TF-FAIL Warning Light. Not
     functional in the Block 50 F-16.         2. TF-FAIL Warning Light


3.   F-ACK Button. When a fault
     appears on the Pilot Fault List                  3. F-ACK Button
     Display (PFLD), the Fault
     Acknowledge (F-ACK) button is
     pressed to acknowledge the fault
     message and, depending on the
     type of fault and severity, clear it
     from the PFLD.
4.   IFF IDENT Button. When                   4. IFF IDENT Button
     pressed, the transponder
     performs an identification-of-
     position function. This is used to momentarily highlight the ownship position when replying to non-
     encrypted transponder interrogations (non-Mode 4 interrogations).
Right Eyebrow Lights
Along the right eyebrow are a series of split emergency lights that often require immediate action when
illuminated.


                                                                              1. ENG FIRE Warning Light
                                                                                     Pushbutton
          2. ENGINE Warning Light
                                                                              3. HYD/OIL PRESS Warning Lights


                                                                              4. FLCS Warning Light


          5. DBU ON Warning Light
                                                                              6. TO/LDG CONFIG Warning Lights



                                                                              7. CANOPY Warning Light


         8. OXY LOW Warning Light




1.   ENG FIRE Warning Light. Illuminates if a fire is detected in the engine compartment.
2.   ENGINE Warning Light. Illuminates when RPM and FTIT indicator signals indicate an over-temperature,
     flameout, or stagnation has occurred. Extinguishes when the conditions no longer exist.
     •    Engine RPM is less than 60%.
          or
     •    Engine FTIT exceeds 1,100° C for 2 seconds or more.
3.   HYD/OIL PRESS Warning Lights. Illuminate when the engine oil or hydraulics indicate low pressures
     within either of the systems.
     •    Engine oil pressure falls below 10 PSI for more than 30 seconds. Extinguishes when engine oil PSI
          exceeds 20 PSI.
          or
     •    Either hydraulic system (A or B) falls below 1,000 PSI. Extinguishes when both hydraulic systems
          exceed 1,000 PSI.
4.   FLCS Warning Light. Illuminates when any of the following conditions exist.
     •    A malfunction is detected within the FLCS processors, power supplies, input commands or sensors, or
          angle of attack or air data inputs.
     •    FLCS built-in test has failed.
     •    Leading-edge flaps are locked.
5.   DBU ON Warning Light. Illuminates if the FLCS has automatically switched to Digital Backup mode or if
     manually commanded to DBU mode using the FLT CONTROL Panel.
6.   TO/LDG CONFIG Warning Lights. Illuminate when each of the following conditions exist.
     •    Altitude is less than 10,000 feet.
     •    Airspeed is less than 190 knots.
     •    Descent rate is greater than 250 feet per minute.
     •    The landing gear is not down and locked or trailing edge flaps are not full down.
     This will also correspond to the landing gear intermittent horn sound.
7.   CANOPY Warning Light. Illuminates when the canopy is not down and locked.
8.   OXY LOW Warning Light. Illuminates if the Backup Oxygen System (BOS) is depleted and <5 PSI.
     Illuminates for 10 seconds when an OBOGS BIT has been initiated and will remain illuminated if a fault is
     detected.


Miscellaneous (MISC) Panel
1.   RF Switch. The Radio Frequency switch
     controls emissions from aircraft.
     •    NORM. FCR emissions are permitted.
                                                                         1. RF Switch
     •    QUIET. FCR emissions are inhibited.
     •    SILENT. FCR emissions are inhibited.                           2. ECM Light


2.   ECM Enable Light. Illuminates when the ECM
     pod is actively emitting jamming signals (if
     equipped and powered).
                                                                3. LASER ARM Switch
3.   LASER ARM Switch. Arms the laser
     designator within the targeting pod sensor
     turret (if equipped and powered).
                                                                   4. ALT REL Button
4.   ALT REL Button. Functions as a backup to
     the weapons release button on the Side Stick
     Controller (SSC) in case of its malfunction.             5. MASTER ARM Switch

5.   MASTER ARM Switch. Enables/disables
     release of aircraft weapons.
                                                                 6. ADV MODE Button
     •    MASTER ARM. FCR and stores
          management system provide weapons
          employment cues and symbology.
          Weapon release and emergency jettison
          is permitted.                              7. Autopilot ROLL/PITCH Switches

     •    OFF. Weapons release is inhibited.
          Emergency jettison is permitted.
     •    SIMULATE. FCR and stores management system provide weapons employment cues and symbology,
          however weapon release is inhibited. Emergency jettison is permitted.
6.   ADV MODE Button. The Advanced Mode button is a terrain following radar function and is not used in the
     Block 50 F-16.
7.   Autopilot ROLL and PITCH Switches. Enables/disables the autopilot and selects the autopilot modes of
     operation. (See Autopilot for more information.)
Standby Attitude Indicator (SAI)
The Standby Attitude Indicator is a self-contained
                                                                      1. Attitude Sphere
attitude indicator that displays aircraft pitch and roll
only. The SAI is electrically powered and is operated
                                                           2. Aircraft Symbol (Waterline)
by a vertical gyroscope.
                                                                        3. Roll Indicator
The SAI can develop errors during aggressive
maneuvers, which may require it to be caged in               4. Roll Indicator Scale
flight using the PULL TO CAGE knob. The SAI is
mounted in the instrument panel at an angle which               5. Pitch Trim Scale
will cause the instrument to be 4° nose down
compared to the ADI when both instruments are set           6. PULL TO CAGE Knob
to their respective pitch trim indexes. If the SAI is
required to be caged in flight, the aircraft should be
flown wings-level with the pitch held at 4° above the horizon.
A red OFF warning flag will appear when the indicator is caged, or electrical power to the SAI has been lost.
1.   Attitude Sphere. Rotates within the SAI to indicate pitch and roll attitude throughout most orientations of
     flight, in relation to the Aircraft Symbol. The light blue hemisphere indicates the aircraft nose is pointed
     above the horizon toward the sky, in a climb. The dark brown hemisphere indicates the aircraft nose is
     pointed below the horizon toward the ground, in a dive.
2.   Aircraft Symbol (Waterline). Provides a fixed attitude reference of the aircraft nose around which the
     Attitude Sphere rotates. The vertical alignment of the symbol can be manually adjusted using the PULL TO
     CAGE knob.
3.   Bank Angle Indicator. Indicates bank angle relative to the horizon. When the indicator is aligned with the
     fixed triangular bank angle index, the aircraft is in a level attitude.
4.   Bank Angle Indicator Scale. Indicates the bank angle when used in conjunction with the Bank Angle
     Indicator. A white triangular bank angle index is set at 0° of bank. Major tick marks are placed at 30°, 60°
     and 90° angles of bank. Minor tick marks are placed at 10° and 20° angles of bank.
5.   Pitch Trim Scale. Provides a reference scale of aircraft pitch when rotating the PULL TO CAGE knob to
     adjust the relative pitch of the Aircraft Symbol. Major tick marks are placed at each side of the Pitch Trim
     Scale at 25° of pitch and minor tick marks are placed at every 5° of pitch.
6.   PULL TO CAGE Knob. Cages the SAI and used to adjust the relative pitch of the Aircraft Symbol in relation
     to the Attitude Sphere. If the knob arrow is aligned with the white triangular index on the Pitch Trim Scale,
     the SAI pitch trim is at zero. When the knob is pulled outward, the Attitude Sphere is caged to a level
     attitude orientation regardless of the aircraft’s actual attitude, causing the OFF warning flag to appear. When
     pulled outward and rotated counterclockwise, the SAI is locked in the caged position.
Fuel Flow Indicator
The FUEL FLOW Indicator displays the current engine fuel consumption rate
in pounds per hour (PPH), in 100-pound increments.




Engine Instruments
1.   Engine OIL Pressure Indicator. Indicates the
     current oil pressure within the engine’s self-contained
                                                               1. Engine OIL Pressure Indicator
     oil lubrication system. The indicator range is 0 PSI to
     100 PSI, with major tick marks in 10 PSI increments
     and minor tick marks in 5 PSI increments. Normal
     indication is 15 PSI when on the ground at idle, and 60
                                                                  2. Engine NOZ POS Indicator
     PSI when in the air at military power and above.
2.   Engine NOZ POS Indicator. Indicates the current
     engine nozzle position as a percentage, with major tick
     marks in 20% increments and minor tick marks in 10%
     increments.                                                       3. Engine RPM Indicator

3.   Engine RPM Indicator. Indicates the current engine
     RPM as supplied by the engine alternator. The indicator
     range is 0% to 110%, with major tick marks every 5%,
     and minor tick marks every 5% from 0%-60% and
     every 1% above 65%.                                               4. Engine FTIT Indicator

4.   Engine FTIT Indicator. Indicates the current engine
     Fan Turbine Inlet Temperature (FTIT) in an average
     temperature in degrees Celsius. The indicator range is
     200° C to 1,200° C, with major tick marks every 100° increments from 200°-700° and 1000°-1200°, and
     every 50° from 700°-1000°. Minor tick marks every 50° increments from 200°-700° and 1000°-1200°, and
     every 10° from 700°-1000°.
Airspeed and Mach Indicator
The Airspeed and Mach indicator is
pneumatically operated by the pitot-               1. VNE Indicator
static system.                                                                           2. Indicated Airspeed Scale
                                          3. Mach Indicator Window
1.   VNE Indicator. Indicates
     Velocity Never Exceed. This
                                              4. Airspeed Indicator
     corresponds with 800 knots at
     sea level.
                                                     5. Airspeed                        6. SET INDEX Knob
2.   Indicated Airspeed Scale.                  Reference Index
     The outer scale of the
     instrument, from 80 to 850
     knots. Tick marks are set at 10-knot increments between 80 and 400 knots, and 50-knot increments between
     400 and 850 knots.
3.   Mach Indicator Window. Indicates Mach equivalent airspeed from 0.5 to 2.2 Mach.
4.   Airspeed Indicator. Indicates indicated airspeed along the outer Indicated Airspeed Scale and Mach speed
     within the Mach Indicator Window.
5.   Airspeed Reference Index. Pilot-adjustable airspeed reference marker.
6.   SET INDEX Knob. Adjusts the Airspeed Reference Index position.


Altimeter
The Altimeter is a dual-mode
pressure altimeter that is electrically
                                                     1. Altitude Scale
operated by the CADC when set to
                                                                                           2. 1000-ft Scale Indicator
the ELEC mode, or by static pressure
                                                        3. PNEU Flag
from the pitot-static system when set
to PNEU mode.                                                                              5. “Kollsman” Window
                                                 4. Altitude Indicator
1.   1000-foot Altitude Scale.                                                             7. Altimeter Mode Switch
     Each    major     tick    mark        6. Barometric Setting Knob
     corresponds   with     100-foot
     increments, with minor tick
     marks corresponding to 10-foot
     increments.
2.   1000-foot Scale Indicator. Indicates the aircraft altitude on the outer 1000-foot scale.
3.   PNEU Flag. Indicates the altimeter is operating in PNEU (pneumatic) mode. The altimeter will automatically
     revert from ELEC to PNEU mode if a malfunction occurs within the CADC or the altimeter electric servo.
4.   Altitude Indicator. Indicates the current barometric altitude in 100-foot increments from -1,000 feet to
     80,000 feet.
5.   “Kollsman” Window. Indicates current altimeter setting correction in inches of mercury (in/Hg). The
     altimeter setting on the F-16 is designed to be used in conjunction with QNH barometric altimeter settings
     to calibrate the altimeter to altitudes above mean sea level (MSL).
6.   Barometric Setting Knob. Sets altimeter setting correction as displayed in the “Kollsman” Window.
7.   Altimeter Mode Switch. Selects ELEC (primary) or PNEU (secondary) operating modes of the altimeter
     by momentarily holding the swtich to either position.
Angle-of-Attack (AoA) Indicator
The Angle-of-Attack Indicator displays the same
information as the Angle-of-Attack Indexer next to the
HUD. The indicator includes colored markers to match the              1. AoA Scale Tape
                                                                                                   3. High AoA
indexer lights next to the HUD.                                                                   Region Marker

1.   AoA Scale Tape. Displays angle-of-attack in a scale
                                                                  2. Current AoA Marker
     from -5° and +32°. Each major tick mark corresponds                                          4. Optimal AoA
                                                                                                  Region Marker
     with 5°-increments, with minor tick marks
     corresponding to 1°-increments.
                                                                                                   5. Low AoA
2.   Current AoA Marker. Indicates the aircraft’s current                                         Region Marker
     angle-of-attack.
3.   High AoA Region Marker. Indicates an AoA between 14° to 16.5°. Aircraft is in an energy depleting,
     greater than optimal, angle-of-attack.
4.   Optimal AoA Region Marker. Indicates an AoA between 11.1° to 13.9°. Aircraft is on-speed with optimal
     angle-of-attack.
5.   Low AoA Region Marker. Indicates an AoA between 8.5° to 11°. Aircraft is in an energy gaining, less
     than optimal, angle-of-attack.


Vertical Velocity Indicator (VVI)
The Vertical Velocity Indicator, or VVI, displays the
rate of climb or descent based on information from      1. Vertical Velocity Tape
the CADC.                                                                                   3. Positive Vertical
                                                                                          Velocity Region Marker
1.   Vertical Velocity Tape. Displays vertical
     velocity in a scale of ±6,000 feet per minute            2. Current Vertical
                                                               Velocity Marker
     (FPM). Each major tick mark corresponds with
     500 FPM increments, with minor tick marks                                              4. Negative Vertical
     corresponding to 100 FPM increments.                                                  Velocity Region Marker

2.   Current Vertical Velocity Marker.
     Indicates the current Vertical Velocity.
3.   Positive Vertical Velocity Region Marker. The light-shaded region indicates a positive vertical velocity
     or climb.
4.   Negative Vertical Velocity Region Marker. The dark-shaded region indicates a negative vertical velocity
     or descent.
Attitude Director Indicator (ADI)
The Attitude Director Indicator, or ADI, displays the aircraft pitch and roll attitude as supplied by the Inertial
Navigation System, or INS. When performing an ILS approach, the ADI displays localizer and glideslope indicators.
(See TACAN Navigation or ILS Navigation for more information.)

                      1. Attitude Sphere                                         2. Upper Bank Angle Indicator


       4. Glideslope Deviation Indicator                                         3. Pitch Scale


          5. Glideslope Deviation Scale                                          6. Aircraft Symbol (Waterline)


                   7. OFF Warning Flag                                           8. AUX Warning Flag


                11. Slip Indicator (Ball)                                        9. Lower Bank Angle Scale


             12. Rate-of-Turn Indicator                                          10. Lower Bank Angle Indicator


                                                                                 13. Pitch Trim Knob




1.   Attitude Sphere. Rotates within the ADI to indicate pitch and roll attitude throughout all orientations of
     flight, in relation to the Aircraft Symbol. The light blue hemisphere indicates the aircraft nose is pointed
     above the horizon toward the sky, in a climb. The dark brown hemisphere indicates the aircraft nose is
     pointed below the horizon toward the ground, in a dive.
2.   Upper Bank Angle Indicator. Indicates bank angle relative to the horizon. When the indicator is aligned
     with the fixed outside bank angle index, the aircraft is in a level attitude.
3.   Pitch Scale. Provides an attitude reference scale of aircraft pitch in relation to the Aircraft Symbol. Major
     tick marks are placed at every 10° of pitch and minor tick marks are placed at every 5° of pitch.
4.   Glideslope Deviation Indicator. Indicates the relative position of the glideslope along the Glideslope
     Deviation Scale when performing an ILS approach. If the indicator is aligned with the center tick mark, the
     aircraft is on glideslope.
5.   Glideslope Deviation Scale. Provides a vertical reference of relative aircraft position above or below the
     glideslope when tuned to an ILS approach frequency and roughly aligned with the approach path for the
     associated landing area. Each white dot corresponds with a 2.5° vertical separation from the glideslope. If
     the Glideslope Indicator is aligned with the top or bottom white dot of the Glideslope Deviation Scale, the
     aircraft is 5° above or 5° below the glideslope, respectively. (See ILS Navigation for more information.)
6.   Aircraft Symbol (Waterline). Provides a fixed attitude reference of the aircraft nose around which the
     Attitude Sphere rotates. The vertical alignment of the symbol can be manually adjusted using the Pitch Trim
     knob.
7.   OFF Warning Flag. Indicates the ADI is not receiving aircraft attitude data from the INS, which may be
     caused by a failure of the ADI itself, a failure of the INS, or if the INS is powered OFF.
8.   AUX Warning Flag. Indicates the ADI is receiving degraded attitude data from the INS, which may be
     caused by a malfunction of the INS or a failure to achieve a coarse alignment.
9.   Lower Bank Angle Scale. Indicates the bank angle when used in conjunction with the Lower Bank Angle
     Indicator. A white triangular bank angle index is set at 0° of bank. Major tick marks are placed at 30°, 60°
     and 90° angles of bank. Minor tick marks are placed at 10° and 20° angles of bank.
10. Lower Bank Angle Indicator. Indicates bank angle relative to the horizon. When the indicator is aligned
    with the fixed outside bank angle index, the aircraft is in a level attitude.
11. Slip Indicator (Ball). Indicates whether the aircraft is in coordinated flight. With the ball centered between
    the two black marks, the aircraft is in coordinated flight, which minimizes drag. When performing a
    “coordinated turn” with the ball kept in the center of the slip indicator, the centripetal force of the turn is
    maintained in alignment with the bottom of the aircraft, and no lateral acceleration is experienced by the
    pilot. If the ball slides to one side in the same direction of a bank, the aircraft is in a non-coordinated
    “slipping turn”. If the ball slides to one side in the opposite direction of a bank, the aircraft is in a non-
    coordinated “skidding turn”.
12. Rate of Turn Indicator. Indicates the aircraft rate of turn, with the lower white bar moving left and right
    to indicate an increased turn rate in that direction. One bar width equates to 1° to 1.2° per second turn
    rate. If the lower white bar is aligned with the upper white bar in the center, the aircraft is not turning. If
    the lower white bar is aligned with the upper white bars on the left or right, the aircraft is in a standard rate,
    3° per second turn. If the lower white bar is centered between two of the upper white bars, the aircraft is
    in a half standard rate turn.
13. Pitch Trim Knob. Used to adjust the relative pitch of the Attitude Sphere in relation to the Aircraft Symbol.
    If the knob arrow is aligned with the white dot on the face of the ADI, the ADI pitch trim is at zero. Each
    click of rotation of the knob will adjust the pitch trim ±0.5°.


FUEL QTY SEL Panel
The Fuel Quantity Select panel allows the pilot to change what fuel tank(s) are used as         1. FUEL QTY SEL Knob
the indication source(s) for the Fuel Quantity Indicator analog needles; and set fuel
transfer priority from external fuel tanks.
1.   FUEL QTY SEL Knob. Controls the analog fuel pointers on the Fuel Quantity
     Indicator.
     •    TEST. Both analog fuel pointers should be set to 2000 pounds. The Fuel
          Totalizer window should display 6000 pounds. The FWD FUEL LOW and AFT
          FUEL LOW lights should illuminate on the Caution Light panel.
     •    NORM. The AL fuel pointer indicates the sum of fuel in the aft reservoir and
          the A-1 fuselage tank. The FR pointer indicates the sum of fuel in the forward
          reservoir tank and the F-1 and F-2 fuselage tanks. Enables bingo fuel
          computation based on total fuselage fuel.
     •    RSVR. The AL pointer indicates remaining fuel in the aft reservoir tank only.
          The FR pointer indicates remaining fuel in the forward reservoir tank only.
     •    INT WING. The AL pointer indicates remaining fuel in the left internal wing          2. EXT FUEL TRANS Switch
          tank only. The FR pointer indicates remaining fuel in the right internal wing
          tank only.
     •    EXT WING. The AL pointer indicates remaining fuel in the left external wing tank only. The FR pointer
          indicates remaining fuel in the right external wing tank only.
     •    EXT CTR. The FR pointer indicates remaining fuel in the external centerline fuel tank. The AL pointer
          will indicate 0.
2.   EXT FUEL TRANS Switch. Controls the fuel transfer priority from external fuel tanks.
     •    NORM. Transfers fuel from the external centerline tank, followed by the external wing tanks.
     •    WING FIRST. Transfers fuel from the external wing tanks, followed by the external centerline tank.
Left Auxiliary Console


                                    Landing Gear Panel




          THREAT WARNING AUX Control Panel




          ALT GEAR Handle




                                                                              CMDS Control Panel




                                                                             HMCS Control Panel




Each text box above may be selected to jump to a more detailed description of that panel. Selecting the image
of the instrument or panel will return the manual back to this page.
The CMDS Control Panel and THREAT WARNING AUX Control Panel are described in the Defensive Systems
chapter.


Landing Gear Panel


      1. EMER STORES JETTISON Button                                            2. HOOK Switch


                                                                                 3. WHEELS Down Lights


                                                                                4. LG Handle

            5. GND JETT ENABLE Switch                                           7. PARKING BRAKE Switch

              6. BRAKES Channel Switch
                                                                                8. DN LOCK REL Button

             9. STORES CONFIG Switch
                                                                                11. LIGHTS Switch

            10. HORN SILENCER Button


     12. SPEED BRAKE Position Indicator
1.   EMER STORES JETTISON Button. When pressed for one full second, this button will apply power to the
     Stores Management System (SMS) and initiate a jettison sequence of all external fuel tanks, carted
     suspension racks, and free fall ordnance loaded on stations 3 through 7. Air-to-air missiles will not be
     jettisoned, nor their missile launchers. There is no requirement for the aircraft to be armed. If the aircraft
     is on the ground with weight-on-wheels, the GND JETT ENABLE switch is required to initiate the emergency
     jettison sequence.
2.   HOOK Switch. This switch extends the hook for emergency arrestment on airfields equipped with an
     arrestment system. However, once the hook is dropped, it cannot be fully retracted from the cockpit.
     •    UP. Commands the pneumatic pressure holding the hook extended to release, allowing the hook to be
          raised over runway arresting wires to taxi clear.
     •    DN. Commands the hook to be released from its stowed position and held to its full extension using
          pneumatic pressure.
3.   WHEELS Down Lights. These show the state of the main landing gear and nosewheel. When green, the
     respective landing gear is down and locked.
4.   LG Handle. Movement of the handle operates electrical switches to command landing gear retraction or
     extension. A warning light in the LG handle illuminates when the gear and doors are in transit or have failed
     to lock in the commanded position. The LG handle warning light also illuminates when the TO/LDG CONFIG
     warning light illuminates on the right eyebrow lights panel.
5.   GND JETT ENABLE Switch. Used by maintenance personnel for checkout and testing of aircraft armament
     systems.
     •    ENABLE. All arming and release conditions are permitted, regardless of landing gear or weight-on-
          wheels conditions.
     •    OFF. When the landing gear are down and the aircraft has weight-on-wheels emergency jettison,
          selective jettison, and normal weapons release functions are inhibited. When the landing gear is down,
          selective jettison and normal weapons release functions are inhibited.
6.   BRAKES Channel Switch. Selects Channel 1 or Channel 2 through which the toe brakes initiate main
     landing gear braking action. This switch is normally kept in the CHAN 1 position.
7.   ANTI-SKID Switch. Controls the anti-skid and parking brake functions of the wheel brakes.
     •    PARKING BRAKE. Applies full brake pressure to each main landing gear brakes when weight-on-
          wheels and the throttle is in the OFF or IDLE positions. If the throttle is advanced 1 inch beyond IDLE,
          the switch will automatically be spring-loaded to the ANTI-SKID position and the parking brake will be
          disengaged. Can be used as an emergency brake in case of a toe brake failure.
     •    ANTI-SKID. Available any time the toe brakes are powered. When the toe brakes are applied to less
          than 85%, the anti-skid system provides deceleration skid control. When the toe brakes are applied at
          85% or greater, the anti-skid system provides maximum performance skid control.
     •    OFF. Anti-skid and parking brake functions are disabled.
8.   DN LOCK REL Button. Mechanically unlocks the spring-actuated lock that holds the LG handle in place,
     should the associated electrical solenoid fail or not be powered. It also overrides the weight-on-wheels signal
     and allows the landing gear to be retracted while on the ground if the LG handle is raised.
9.   STORES CONFIG Switch. Adjusts FLCS based on stores configuration. When set to CAT III the FLCS limits
     the angle of attack and onset rates in order to increase departure resistance. This switch has no effect when
     the FLCS gains are set to takeoff/landing configuration (landing gear deployed or air refueling door open).
     •    CAT I. Used for air-to-air loadouts without external wing tanks.
     •    CAT III. Used for air-to-ground loadouts or when equipped with external wing tanks.
10. HORN SILENCER Button. Silences the landing gear warning or low-speed warning audio tones.
11. LANDING TAXI LIGHTS Switch. Controls the nose landing gear-mounted light assemblies for
    takeoff/landing or taxi operations. The lights are automatically disabled when the LG Handle is raised to the
    UP position.
     •    LANDING. Enables the Landing light.
     •    OFF. The Landing and Taxi lights are disabled.
     •    TAXI. Enables the Taxi light.
12. SPEED BRAKE Position Indicator. Indicates whether the speedbrakes are
    deployed, fully-retracted, or if receiving no power. When the speedbrakes are
    fully-retracted the indicator displays CLOSED (left image). When the speed
    brakes are deployed at any angle, the indicator displays a pattern of nine dots
    (right image). If the speedbrakes have no power, the indicator displays a striped
    line pattern (not shown).


HMCS Control Panel
Controls the brightness of the HMCS symbology projected onto the
helmet visor. Rotating the knob clockwise increases the brightness
intensity of the symbology and rotating it to the OFF position
removes the HMCS symbology from the visor.


ALT GEAR Handle
The Alternate Gear Handle releases the landing gear in case of a hydraulic failure or inability
to lower the main landing gear handle. (N/I)
Right Auxiliary Console

                                                        FUEL Quantity Indicator
       Magnetic Compass


                                                                  System A & B HYD PRESS Indicators




     Pilot Fault List Display (PFLD)


                                                                                      EPU Fuel Quantity




                 Caution Light Panel




                                                                                        Mechanical Clock


                                             Cabin Pressure




Each text box above may be selected to jump to a more detailed description of that individual instrument or
panel. Selecting the image of the instrument or panel will return the manual back to this page.


Magnetic Compass
The magnetic compass is a self-contained indicator which shows the heading of the
aircraft in relation to magnetic north.




Fuel Quantity Indicator
The FUEL Quantity Indicator displays total remaining fuel in all tanks via the totalizer
numerical readout in pounds (lbs) of fuel. Two analog needles indicate fuel in Aft and
Left (AL) and Forward and Right (FR) tanks in 100-pound increments.
The FUEL QTY SEL knob can be used to change which internal or external fuel tanks
the analog needles are referencing to display calculated fuel quantity.
If the two needles become too divergent, indicating a fuel imbalance, red will be shown
at the base of a needle. In such a case, the ENGINE FEED knob on the FUEL Control
Panel can be used to correct the imbalance.
Pilot Fault List Display (PFLD)
The Pilot Fault List Display, or PFLD, lists all FLCS detected faults.
Two types of PFLDs are displayed: WARNING level and CAUTION
level. Warnings are associated with the FLCS and have a bracket
around them. Cautions are associated with other FLCS elements,
engine, and avionics systems.
When a PFLD item is displayed, its corresponding caution light
indicator will illuminate, and the MASTER CAUTION light will be lit. To clear a PFLD fault, the fault acknowledge
(F-ACK) button is pressed.


Caution Light Panel
The Caution Light panel consists of multiple indicator lights associated with possible detected fault conditions.




FLCS FAULT. A dual malfunction has occurred in the Flight Control Computer (FLCC) electronics, the leading-
edge flaps (LEF) are locked, or the FLCS BIT has failed.
ENGINE FAULT. An engine-related fault has been detected. Extinguishes when the fault is acknowledged.
AVIONICS FAULT. An avionics-related fault has been detected or the Multiplex Bus (MUX) has lost
communication with the engine or the FLCC.
SEAT NOT ARMED. The ejection seat arming lever is in the dis-armed (up) position.
ELEC SYS. An electrical fault has been detected and an associated indicator light is illuminated on the ELEC
Control Panel.
SEC. Engine is operating in Secondary control mode.
EQUIP HOT. Cooling air temperature or pressure to the avionics bay is insufficient. Automatically interrupts
electrical power to the FCR.
NWS FAIL. A failure in the nose wheel steering system has occurred.
PROBE HEAT. Air flow to the pitot, fuselage air data, or AoA probes has decreased to a level that may indicate
an icing condition; or a probe heater or the monitoring system has failed.
FUEL/OIL HOT. Fuel supplied to the engine or the engine oil has become excessively hot.
RADAR ALT. The radar altimeter has malfunctioned.
ANTI SKID. The Anti-Skid switch has been set to the OFF position or a malfunction has been detected in the
braking system while ground speed is >5 knots.
CADC. A malfunction in the Central Air Data Computer has been detected.
INLET ICING. Ice accumulation has been detected by the engine inlet ice detector or the inlet ice detector has
failed.
IFF. The IFF system has received a Mode 4 interrogation but cannot reply due to Mode 4 replies being inhibited
by the RF switch on the Instrument Panel or the MODE 4 REPLY switch on the IFF control panel, or the Mode 4
has been zeroized.
HOOK. The emergency arresting hook is not up and locked in its stowed position.
STORES CONFIG. The STORES CONFIG switch is in the wrong position.
OVERHEAT. An overheat condition has been detected in the engine compartment, main landing gear wheel
wells, ECS bay, or EPU bay.
NUCLEAR. (Not implemented)
OBOGS. ECS air pressure is <10 PSI.
ATF NOT ENGAGED. No function.
EEC. No function.
CABIN PRESS. Cockpit pressure altitude is >27,000 feet.
FWD FUEL LOW. Forward reservoir fuel quantity is <400 lb.
BUC. No function.
AFT FUEL LOW. Aft reservoir fuel quantity is <250 lb.
Hydraulic Pressure (System A & System B) Indicators
The HYD PRESS A & B gauges indicate the current pressures for hydraulic systems A
and B respectively, in 500 PSI increments from 0 to 4000 PSI. Normal operation is
between 2,850 and 3,250 PSI.




EPU Fuel Quantity Indicator
The EPU Fuel Quantity gauge indicates the remaining supply of hydrazine as a
percentage in 5% increments. At 100%, the EPU can run for approximately 10-15
minutes.




Cabin Pressure
The Cabin Pressure gauge indicates the current cockpit pressure expressed as an
altitude, in 1,000-foot increments from 0 to 50,000 feet.
As an example, an indication of 7 on this gauge indicates the cockpit pressure is equal
to a pressure altitude of 7,000 feet.




Mechanical Clock
The mechanical clock is an 8-day, manually wound clock. The clock
time can be adjusted by pulling the knob and rotating it until the           1. “Day” Hand
time is set as desired.
                                                                            2. “Hour” Hand
1.   “Day” Hand. One full revolution equals 8 days.
                                                                           3. “Minute” Hand
2.   “Hour” Hand. One full revolution equals 12 hours, indicated
     by the inner clock ring.
                                                                       4. Wind/Control Knob
3.   “Minute” Hand. One full revolution equals 60 minutes,
     indicated by the outer clock ring.
4.   Wind/Control Knob. Rotating this knob clockwise winds the clock spring. Rotating this knob in either
     direction while pulled adjusts the clock to the desired time.
NOTE: The mechanical clock is automatically set to local time at mission start.
Left Console

   MANUAL CANOPY                           DEFOG Lever             CANOPY JETTISON T-Handle        ENG & JET START Control Panel
  CONTROL Handcrank

                                                                      FUEL Control Panel     EPU Control Panel       MANUAL PITCH
   FLT CONTROL Panel                                                                                                 Override Switch




                                                                                                           UHF Backup Control Panel
    TEST Panel




                       IFF Control Panel


             MANUAL TRIM Panel                ELEC Control Panel


    ANTI-G TEST Button       EXT LIGHTING Control Panel      AVTR Control Panel       ECM Control Panel    AUDIO 1 & 2 Control Panels



Each text box above may be selected to jump to a more detailed description of that panel. Selecting the image
of the instrument or panel will return the manual back to this page.
The UHF Backup Control Panel is described in the Radio Communications chapter. The ECM Control Panel is
described in the Defensive Systems chapter.


Manual Pitch Override Switch
In case of a deep stall departure, the Manual Pitch Override (MPO) switch allows the
pilot to command greater authority from the horizontal stabilators to reinforce pitch
oscillations until sufficient pitch rates are present for recovery into controlled flight. The
guards on either side of the switch allow the pilot to better grip the switch in case of
an inverted departure when hanging upside down from the seat straps.
     •     NORM. Normal operation. The switch is spring-loaded to this position.
     •     OVRD. When held to this position, the horizontal stabilator authority is
           increased to assist with recovery. Note that pilot roll and yaw commands from the Side Stick Controller
           (SSC) are inhibited when the switch is held in this position, however the rudder pedals will still retain
           yaw input authority.
ENG & JET START Control Panel
The Engine & Jet Start panel governs the start system for the
F110-GE-129 engine and related controls.                                   1. RUN Light

1.   JET FUEL – RUN Light. Illuminates within 30 seconds
     after JFS initiation to indicate the Jet Fuel Starter (JFS)
                                                                          2. JFS Switch
     is operating at its governed speed.
2.   JET FUEL – JFS Switch. The JET FUEL switch uses one
     or both brake/JFS accumulators to drive the hydraulic
     starter motor of the Jet Fuel Starter. The JFS may be          3. ENG CONT Switch
     started even if the MASTER switch on the FUEL control
     panel is set to OFF.
     •    START 1. A single brake/JFS accumulator is used
          to spool up the JFS into operation.
     •    OFF. Turns off the Jet Fuel Starter. During ground         4. AB RESET Switch
          starts, the JFS will automatically switch OFF when
          the engine RPM attains 55%. During in-flight
          restarts the JFS will not automatically shut down
          and must be manually switched to OFF.
     •    START 2. Both brake/JFS accumulators are used to
                                                                   5. MAX POWER Switch
          spool up the JFS into operation.
          NOTE: START 2 is required when the ambient
          temperature is above 38°C or below -7°C, or if
          attempting to restart the engine below 20,000 feet.
3.   ENG CONT Switch. Manually selects the engine control mode.
     •    PRI. Sets engine operation to Primary control mode. This position is used for normal operations, which
          utilizes the Digital Electronic Control (DEC) to manage the functions of the engine and the afterburner.
          The DEC is an electronic computer that controls fuel flow, fan and core speed limiting, turbine
          temperature limiting, pressure ratios, nozzle position, and ensures stable operation throughout all
          altitudes, airspeeds, and maneuvers to prevent compressor stalls or engine damage.
     •    SEC. Sets engine operation to Secondary control mode and illuminates the SEC caution light on the
          Caution Light panel. This system uses only the hydromechanical fuel scheduling of the Main Engine
          Control (MEC) in case of a malfunction or failure in the DEC. This mode may be entered automatically
          by the DEC or manually selected by the pilot. When operating in Secondary mode the afterburner will
          be unavailable, the nozzle will be fixed in the closed position, temperature and speed limiting will be
          disabled, and overall thrust will be reduced but the engine will produce higher thrust at idle power.
4.   AB RESET Switch. Spring-loaded to the NORM position and used to record engine diagnostic data. (N/I)
     •    AB RESET. This switch position is not functional in F-16s equipped with the F110-GE-129 engine.
     •    NORM. Normal position.
     •    ENG DATA. Momentarily moving switch to this position records 8 seconds of engine data into the
          Engine Monitoring System Computer (EMSC), starting with 6 seconds prior to the switch being moved
          to the ENG DATA position to 2 seconds following.
5.   MAX POWER Switch. This switch is not functional in F-16s equipped with the F110-GE-129 engine.
EPU Control Panel
The Emergency Power Unit is a bleed air- and/or hydrazine-             1. EPU Switch   2. EPU Run Light       3. AIR Light
powered, self-contained unit that can provide emergency
hydraulic and electrical power for approximately 10 to 15
minutes. In the case of an engine failure, the EPU provides
power to the Hydraulic system A and electrical systems.
1.   EPU Switch. Sets the EPU to automatic operation or
     manually commands the EPU on/off.
     •    OFF. Manually commands the EPU off during ground
          operations. Manually commands the EPU off in flight                                  4. HYDRAZN Light
          unless both the main and standby generators have
          failed. EPU operation will be inhibited in flight if the switch has remained in the OFF position since
          takeoff.
     •    NORM. Used during normal operations. If set to NORM at any time since takeoff, the EPU will be
          commanded on automatically if power from the main and standby generators has been lost, or both
          hydraulic systems have failed. If aircraft is on the ground and the engine is shut down, the EPU will
          not automatically be commanded to on.
     •    ON. Manually commands the EPU to on.
2.   EPU Run Light. Illuminates when the EPU is operating and EPU-driven hydraulic pump discharge pressure
     is >2,000 PSI.
3.   AIR Light. Illuminates when the EPU is operating using engine bleed air.
4.   HYDRAZN Light. Illuminates when the EPU is operating using hydrazine, which is typically required when
     engine RPM drops below 82%-90%, depending on pressure altitude, or if the engine fails completely.


ELEC Control Panel
The Electrical panel provides controls for the selecting         1. MAIN PWR Switch      2. ELEC CAUTION RESET Button
electrical power sources and indications of malfunctions                                            Switch

within the electrical system and electrical supply to the FLCS
channels.                                                                                                 3. FLCS PMG Light

1.   MAIN PWR Switch. Selects the electrical power                                                        4. MAIN GEN Light
     source for the aircraft.
                                                                                                      5. STBY GEN Light
     •    MAIN PWR. Connects main engine generator or
          external power to the electrical system. Enables
          the standby generator. If AC power is not                                                       6. EPU GEN Light
          available, battery power is supplied to the battery
          bus only.                                                                                       7. EPU PMG Light


     •    BATT. Disconnects main generator and external
          power from the electrical system and resets main                                                8. FAIL Light
          generator. Disables the standby generator.
          Battery power is supplied to the battery bus only.
                                                              9. TO FLCS Light 10. FLCS RLY Light
     •    OFF. If in flight, disconnects power from main
          generator and disables the standby generator. If
          on the ground, disconnects main generator and external power from the electrical system and disables
          the standby generator.
2.   ELEC CAUTION RESET Button. Clears MASTER CAUTION and ELEC SYS caution lights and resets the
     main and standby generators.
3.   FLCS PMG Light. Illuminates in flight if none of the FLCS branches are receiving power from the FLCS
     Permanent Magnet Generator. Illuminates on the ground after 60 seconds of weight-on-wheels if one or
     more of the FLCS branches aren’t receiving power from the FLCS PMG.
4.   MAIN GEN Light. Illuminates when there is no external or main generator power connected to the non-
     essential AC buses.
5.   STBY GEN Light. Illuminates when standby generator power is not available.
6.   EPU GEN Light. The Illuminates when the EPU has been commanded on but is not providing power to
     both emergency buses. Light is inhibited if EPU switch is set to OFF and aircraft is weight-on-wheels with
     the engine is running.
7.   EPU PMG Light. Illuminates when the EPU has been commanded on, but the EPU Permanent Magnet
     Generator is not providing power to all branches of the FLCS.
8.   ACFT BATT – FAIL Light. Illuminates in flight to indicate a battery failure (20 volts or less). Illuminates
     on the ground after 60 seconds of weight-on-wheels to indicate a batter failure or battery charger failure.
9.   ACFT BATT – TO FLCS Light. Illuminates in flight if one or more FLCS branches are receiving power from
     the battery bus of 25 volts or less. Illuminates on the ground if battery power is going to one or more FLCS
     branches.
10. ACFT BATT – FLCS RLY Light. Illuminates if one or more FLCS branches are receiving less than 20 volts
    from the battery bus or if one or more FLCS branches are not connected to the battery bus. May be reset
    using the FLCS RESET switch on the FLT CONTROL panel.


AUDIO 1 & AUDIO 2 Control Panels
The AUDIO 1 panel controls the                1. COMM 1           2. COMM 2        5. SECURE VOICE
volume of the UHF and VHF                  Power/Volume Knob   Power/Volume Knob     Volume Knob

radios, missile audio feedback,
and RWR threat warning audio. It
also includes controls for selecting                                                                 6. MSL Volume Knob
squelch and GUARD operating
                                         3. COMM 1
modes for the UHF and VHF                Mode Knob                                                   7. TF Volume Knob
radios.
The AUDIO 2 panel controls the           4. COMM 2                                                    8. THREAT
                                         Mode Knob                                                   Volume Knob
volume of the intercom, TACAN
and ILS, along with the power of
                                       9. INTERCOM
the ILS receiver.                      Volume Knob
                                                                                                     12. Microphone Switch

1.   COMM 1 Power/Volume
     Knob. Rotating this knob                   10. TACAN Volume Knob   11. ILS Power/Volume Knob
     clockwise will increase the
     audio volume from the UHF radio. Rotating this knob fully counterclockwise will disable the UHF radio.
2.   COMM 1 Mode Knob. Controls the squelch and GUARD functions of the UHF radio.
     •    OFF. Disables squelch.
     •    SQL. Enables squelch.
     •    GD. The UHF radio is tuned to 243.0 MHz and the dedicated GUARD receiver is disabled. This knob
          position has no effect if C & I knob on IFF control panel is set to BACK UP.
3.   COMM 2 Power/Volume Knob. Rotating this knob clockwise will increase the audio volume from the VHF
     radio. Rotating this knob fully counterclockwise will disable the VHF radio.
4.   COMM 2 Mode Knob. Sets the VHF radio
     •    OFF. Disables squelch.
     •    SQL. Enables squelch.
     •    GD. The VHF radio is tuned to 121.5 MHz.
5.   SECURE VOICE Volume Knob. No function.
6.   MSL Volume Knob. Rotating this knob clockwise will increase the audio volume from the currently selected
     AIM-9 missile.
7.   TF Volume Knob. No function.
8.   THREAT Volume Knob. Rotating this knob clockwise will increase the audio volume from the ALR-56M
     radar warning receiver.
9.   INTERCOM Volume Knob. Rotating this knob clockwise will increase the audio volume from the intercom
     system. The intercom system is used to communicate directly to ground crews or the boom operator of an
     aerial refueling tanker through the refueling boom itself. This knob will also affect the volume of the landing
     gear and low speed warning tones and avionics voice messages. (N/I)
10. TACAN Volume Knob. Rotating this knob clockwise will increase the audio volume from the TACAN
    receiver. This is used to identify the station the TACAN receiver is tuned to by monitoring the morse code
    identifier broadcast over the TACAN frequency itself.
11. ILS Power/Volume Knob. Rotating this knob clockwise will increase the audio volume from the currently
    tuned ILS localizer station. This is used to identify the localizer the ILS receiver is tuned to by monitoring
    the morse code identifier broadcast over the ILS frequency itself. Rotating the knob full counterclockwise to
    OFF will disable the ILS receiver.
12. HOT MIC CIPHER Switch. Controls the operating mode of the intercom and radios. (N/I)
     •    HOT MIC. Activates direct communication to the ground crew or the boom operator of the aerial
          refueling aircraft when the boom is seated in the aerial refueling receptacle. Transmitting over the UHF
          or VHF radios will override this direct communication while transmissions are occurring.
     •    OFF. Disables HOT MIC and CIPHER functions.
     •    CIPHER. Placing the switch in this position filters out non-secure radio signals over the UHF and/or
          VHF radios if secure voice is enabled.


AVTR Control Panel
The Airborne Video Tape Recorder, or AVTR, records the HUD
and MFDs or the HMCS and MFDs depending on the setting.
(N/I)
FUEL Control Panel
The Fuel panel includes controls for tank pressurization and             1. FUEL MASTER Switch       3. ENG FEED Knob
fuel system management.
1.   FUEL MASTER Switch. Opens/closes the main fuel
     shutoff valve to the engine. This is normally kept in the
     MASTER position with the guard closed.
2.   TANK INERTING Switch. When set to the TANK
     INERTING position, non-volatile halon gas is pumped into
     the fuel tanks to reduce internal pressure and reduce risk
                                                                          2. TANK INERTING Switch       4. AR REFUEL Switch
     of fire during an emergency (e.g., from battle damage).
3.   ENGINE FEED Knob. Energizes or de-energizes the fuel pumps and maintains the center-of-gravity with
     fuel loading. If an imbalance is indicated on the fuel quantity indicator by a divergence between the two
     fuel needles, the AFT and FWD positions allow selective control for the pumps on the respective fuel tanks
     to manually shift the center-of-gravity.
     •    OFF. Disables both fuel pumps. Engine is supplied fuel via the Fuel Flow Proportioner (FFP), which is
          powered by the Hydraulic system A.
     •    NORM. Enables both fuel boost pumps. Engine is supplied fuel from the forward and aft fuel tanks.
          Aircraft center-of-gravity (CG) is maintained automatically through fuel balancing.
     •    AFT. Enables aft fuel boost pump. Engine is supplied fuel from the aft fuel tank only. Fuel is transferred
          from the aft tanks to the forward tanks. Aircraft CG is shifted forward.
     •    FWD. Enables forward fuel boost pump. Engine is supplied fuel from the forward fuel tank only. Fuel
          is transferred from the forward tanks to the aft tanks. Aircraft CG is shifted rearward.
4.   AIR REFUEL Switch. Controls the aerial refueling door, associated exterior lighting, and fuel tank
     pressurization for aerial refueling operations. If the aircraft is less than 400 knots airspeed, when switch is
     set to OPEN the FLCS gains are set to takeoff/landing configuration.
     •    OPEN. Opens aerial refueling door, reduces internal tank pressurization and depressurizes external
          tanks. Activates fuselage- and tail-mounted AR floodlights, which can be adjusted using the AERIAL
          REFUELING knob on the EXT LIGHTING control panel.
     •    CLOSE. Closes aerial refueling door, increases internal tank pressurization and repressurizes external
          tanks. Extinguishes fuselage- and tail-mounted AR floodlights.


IFF Control Panel
The IFF panel provides backup control of              1. MASTER Knob        2. M-4 CODE Switch      3. C & I Knob
essential CNI functions and some primary
functions of the APX-113 Advanced IFF
transponder/interrogator system.
1.   MASTER Knob. Selects the mode the
                                                                                                                6. MODE 4
     APX-113 AIFF system operates. This knob                                                                   REPLY Switch
     functions regardless of the C&I knob
     position. (N/I)
                                                                                                                 7. MODE 4
     •    OFF.     Transponder      and   IFF                                                                  MONITOR Switch
          interrogation functions are powered
          off.
                                                      4. ENABLE Switch      5. MODE 1 & MODE 3 Thumbwheel Selectors
     •    STBY. Transponder functions are inhibited but the IFF interrogator will function normally.
     •    LOW/NORM. Transponder and IFF interrogation functions are operating.
     •    EMER. Transponder will reply with an emergency transponder code when interrogated.
2.   M-4 CODE Switch. Manages the security of the Mode 4 encrypted codes. (N/I)
     •    A/B. Enables normal Mode 4 coded replies. Switch is spring-loaded to this position.
     •    ZERO. Momentarily placing switch in this position will erase encrypted codes from the IFF internal
          memory.
     •    HOLD. Momentarily placing switch in this position prior to placing the MASTER knob to OFF will retain
          the Mode 4 encrypted codes in the IFF internal memory. Otherwise, the encrypted codes will be erased
          after the IFF is powered off or the aircraft is shut down.
3.   C & I Knob. Controls how the pilot interacts with the IFF system and UHF radio.
     •    UFC. Pilot controls primary IFF functions and UHF radio using the Upfront Controls (ICP and DED).
     •    BACK UP. Pilot controls all IFF functions using the IFF control panel itself. The UHF Backup control
          panel is used to control the UHF radio.
4.   Enable Switch. Selects between using Mode 3 and Mode S codes or Mode 1 and Mode 3 codes when the
     C&I knob is set to the BACK UP position. (N/I)
     •    M3/MS. Mode 3/A and Mode S are enabled.
     •    OFF. Mode 1, Mode 3/A, Mode 4 and Mode S are disabled.
     •    M1/M3. Mode 1 and Mode 3/A are enabled.
5.   MODE 1 & MODE 3 Thumbwheel Selectors. Allows the pilot to input Mode 1 and Mode 3 codes when
     the C&I knob is set to the BACK UP position. Note that only the first two digits of Mode 3 can be entered in
     this manner. The third and fourth digits are internally set to zero, permitting only Mode 3 codes ending in
     “00” to be used. (N/I)
6.   MODE 4 REPLY Switch. Allows the pilot to select how the IFF system should reply to Mode 4 interrogations
     when the C&I knob is set to the BACK UP position. (N/I)
     •    A. The first IFF encrypted code is used to reply to Mode 4 interrogations.
     •    B. The second IFF encrypted code is used to reply to Mode 4 interrogations.
     •    OUT. Replies to Mode 4 interrogations are inhibited.
7.   MODE 4 MONITOR Switch. Allows the pilot to control the audio tone notification for Mode 4 replies. (N/I)
     •    AUDIO. An audio tone will sound whenever the IFF transponder system sends an encrypted reply to
          a Mode 4 interrogation.
     •    OUT. Mode 4 audio tone is disabled.
EXT LIGHTING Control Panel
The Exterior Lighting panel controls all externally mounted lights on the aircraft.



                                                          Anti-collision Light
                                                             FORM Knob


              White Position Light
                                                                                 AR Refuel Lights

                                                                                                                    Red Position Light

                  Fuselage Light
                   (both sides)




              Green Position Light
                                             Formation Lights                                  Green Position Light




1.   POSITION        –    FLASH/STEADY                               4. ANTI-COLL Knob        1. FLASH/STEADY Switch          2. WING/TAIL Switch
     Switch. Toggles the WING/TAIL
     position lights between flashing and
     steady modes.
2.   POSITION – WING/TAIL Switch.                                                                                                    3. FUSELAGE Switch
     This switch sets the wingtip and intake
     red/green and the tail mounted white
     position lights to fixed brightness levels
     of bright or dim. If the switch is set to
     OFF, the wingtip mounted red/green
     position lights revert to the brightness
     level set by the FORM knob.
                                                                     5. FORM Knob       7. MASTER Knob            6. AERIAL REFUELING Knob
3.   FUSELAGE Switch. This switch
     controls the fuselage mounted lights that illuminate the vertical tail.
4.   ANTI-COLL Knob. This knob can be set to OFF or one of 7 options that vary the flash pattern of the anti-
     collision light.

 1                                                                                  A
      1               1              1           1         1                             1                2               1              2
 2                                                                                  B
          2                  2                   2              2                         1                   3                1                 3
 3                                                                                  C
              3                          3                 3                                          6                                      6
 4
                  4                          4
                                                     ANTI-COLL Knob - Flash Patterns
5.    FORM Knob. Controls the brightness of the red and green formation lights on each wingtip and the white
      formation lights on the top and bottom of the center fuselage. The FORM knob functionality is only active
      for the wingtip lights when the POSITION – WING/TAIL switch is set to OFF.




          All lights on and set to bright                          All lights off except FORM knob;
                                                                     FORM knob set to minimum

6.    AERIAL REFUELING Knob. Sets the brightness of the lights that illuminate the dorsal refueling receptacle
      to assist the air refueling boom operator during night refueling operations. The AERIAL REFUELING knob
      functionality is only active when the AR REFUEL switch on the FUEL control panel is set to OPEN.
7.    MASTER Knob. Sets the exterior lighting master mode. The table below details how each position of the
      MASTER knob enables or overrides the respective lighting system’s switch or knob.
                                                  COVERT          COVERT          COVERT
                                    OFF             ALL             A-C            FORM                 ALL
         ANTI-COLL                  Off              Off             Off            Switch             Switch
        WING/TAIL                   Off              Off           Switch            Off               Switch
         FUSELAGE                   Off              Off           Switch            Off               Switch
            FORM                    Off              Off            Knob   1
                                                                                     Off               Knob1
     AERIAL REFUELING               Off            Knob2            Knob2           Knob2              Knob2
1.    Requires the WING/TAIL switch to be set to OFF to control the brightness of each wingtip light
2.    Requires the AR REFUEL switch on the FUEL Control Panel to be set to OPEN
FLT CONTROL Panel
The Flight Control panel controls manual settings       1. DIGITAL          2. MANUAL TF
of the flight control systems. This panel is           BACKUP Switch        FLY-UP Switch
normally not used due to the automated nature
of the F-16C’s flight control systems.
                                                                                                      3. ALT FLAPS Switch
1.   DIGITAL BACKUP Switch. Selects the
     FLCC backup software. When enabled, the
     DBU ON warning light on the right eyebrow
     panel will illuminate and the HUD will                                                           4. FLCS RUN/FAIL
     display a flashing WARN message.                                                                  Indicator Lights


2.   MANUAL TF FLY-UP Switch. This is a
     terrain-following radar function and is not
     used in the Block 50 F-16.                                                                       7. FLCS BIT Switch


3.   ALT FLAPS Switch. Controls manual
     deployment of the trailing edge flaps.            5. LE FLAPS Switch      6. FLCS RESET Switch
     •    EXTEND. Manually deploys the
          trailing-edge flaps (TEF) at low speeds prior to landing if the trailing edge flaps have failed to deploy
          with the landing gear.
     •    NORM. Enables automatic scheduling of trailing-edge flaps based on FLCS commands
4.   FLCS RUN/FAIL Indicator Lights. When a FLCS BIT is initiated, the green RUN light illuminates and will
     extinguish when the test is complete. If a problem is encountered during the BIT, the red FAIL light
     illuminates, and the failure will be displayed on the Pilot Fault List Display (PFLD).
5.   LE FLAPS Switch. Controls manual deployment of the leading-edge flaps. (N/I)
     •    LOCK. Manually locks the leading-edge flaps in position and illuminates the FLCS warning light. This
          might be used in the case of a leading-edge flap failure with asymmetric flap settings.
     •    AUTO. Enables automatic scheduling of leading-edge flaps based on FLCS commands.
6.   FLCS RESET Switch. Resets the FLCS warning lights and servo/electrical failures within the FLCS system.
     Resets FLCS warning light, MASTER CAUTION light, CADC caution light, FLCS caution light, and clears PFLD
     if the associated faults are actually cleared.
7.   FLCS BIT Switch. Commands a BIT test of the FLCS if there is weight-on-wheels and ground speed is <28
     knots. Setting the switch to the BIT position will initiate the flight control surface test sequence and is
     performed during start-up. The test will run for approximately 45 seconds, during which time the switch is
     magnetically held in the BIT position. When the test is complete the switch is released and will return to the
     OFF position.
MANUAL TRIM Panel
The Manual Trim panel controls manual trim values in pitch, roll          1. ROLL TRIM          4. TRIM/AP
and yaw. This might be used in the case of a malfunction with Trim       Wheel & Indicator      DISC Switch

Switch on the Side Stick Controller (SSC). This panel is normally
not used since the F-16C’s flight control systems provide automatic
trim in pitch, and the pilot can trim in pitch and roll using the 4-
way trim switch on the SSC.
1.   ROLL TRIM Wheel & Indicator. Trims aircraft in the roll
     axis and indicates the degree of manual trim applied.
2.   YAW TRIM Knob. Trims aircraft in the yaw axis. The degree
     of manual yaw trim applied is indicated by the outside dot
     pattern.
3.   PITCH TRIM Wheel & Indicator. Trims aircraft in the pitch
     axis and indicates the degree of manual trim applied.              2. YAW TRIM Knob      3. PITCH TRIM
                                                                                             Wheel & Indicator
4.   TRIM/AP DISC Switch. Controls source of trim inputs and
     autopilot engagement.
     •    NORM. Pitch/Roll trim is controlled using either the 4-way Trim Switch on the SSC or this panel.
          Autopilot engagement is permitted.
     •    DISC. Pitch/Roll trim is exclusively controlled using this panel. Trim Switch on the SSC is disabled.
          Autopilot engagement is inhibited.


TEST Panel
The Test panel includes several controls
for performing built-in tests (BIT) of
several F-16C systems and test all
cockpit indicator lights.                        1. FIRE & OHEAT
                                                                                                       3. MAL & IND
                                                DETECT Test Button
                                                                                                      LTS Test Button
1.   FIRE & OHEAT DETECT Test
     Button. Tests the circuit continuity
     of the fire and overheat detection        2. OBOGS BIT Switch
     systems. This will cause the ENG                                                                  6. FLCS
     FIRE warning light and the                                                                       PWR Lights
     OVERHEAT caution lights to              4. PROBE HEAT Switch

     illuminate. This will in turn trigger
     the MASTER CAUTION light.
                                             5. EPU/GEN Test Switch
2.   OBOGS BIT Switch. Tests the                                                                  7. FLCS PWR
     On-Board    Oxygen     Generation                                                            TEST Switch
     System (OBOGS). Moving this
     switch momentarily to the OBOGS
     BIT position will cause the OXY
     LOW eyebrow warning light to illuminate for 10 seconds. If no faults are detected within the OBOGS
     monitoring system, the light will extinguish. If the OXY LOW warning light remains illuminated, a fault has
     been detected.
3.   MAL & IND LTS Test Button. Illuminates all warning, caution, and indication lights to verify their function,
     as well as audio voice messages.
4.   PROBE HEAT Switch. Controls the external air data probes and probe heat monitoring system when on
     the ground. When in flight, the pitot, fuselage air data, AoA, and total temperature probes and the probe
     heat monitoring system are always active.
     •    HEAT. Enables heating of the pitot, fuselage air data, AoA, and total temperature probes when on the
          ground. Also enables the probe heat monitoring system.
     •    OFF. Disables heating of the data probes when on the ground.
     •    TEST. Performs a test of the probe heat monitoring system. The PROBE HEAT caution light will flash
          on the Caution Light Panel following a successful test. If it does not illuminate or does not flash, the
          probe heat monitoring system is inoperative.
5.   EPU/GEN Switch. Momentarily pressing this switch to the TEST position tests the EPU generator and EPU
     PMG (Permanent Magnet Generator) output to the FLCS channels without using hydrazine while on the
     ground.
6.   FLCS PWR Lights. Illuminates to indicate power output to each of the four redundant flight control
     channels (A, B, C and D) when the FLCS PWR switch is set to TEST.
7.   FLCS PWR TEST Switch. Tests power output to the FLCS (pronounced “flick-iss”) when MAIN PWR switch
     is set to BATT or MAIN PWR positions.
     •    TEST. Tests power output to the FLCS channels.
     •    NORM. Tests EPU PMG availability when EPU/GEN switch is set to TEST and MAIN PWR switch is set
          to MAIN PWR.
     •    MAINT. Used for maintenance tests by ground personnel.


Canopy Switch & Canopy Handle
The Canopy Switch controls the actuator to raise and
lower the canopy. The Canopy Handle locks/unlocks the          1. Canopy Switch   2. Canopy Lever (Unlocked Position)
canopy and inflates/deflates the canopy pressure seal.
1.   Canopy Switch. Controls the canopy actuator.
     •    Up. When the Canopy Lever is in the unlocked
          position, this position raises the canopy
          actuator to full extension. The switch will
          automatically snap back to the center position
          when the canopy actuator reaches full
          extension.
     •    Center. The canopy actuator stops canopy
          motion.
     •    Down. This position lowers the canopy actuator to full retraction. The switch is spring-loaded to center
          from this position and must be held to lower and close the canopy.
2.   Canopy Lever. Prevents the canopy from un-latching and controls the canopy pressure seal.
     •    Unlocked (open, pulled outward). The canopy pressure seal is deflated, and the CANOPY eyebrow
          warning light illuminates. The Canopy Lever should be placed in this position prior to lowering the
          canopy. The Canopy Lever also physically limits the full travel of the throttle lever.
     •    Locked (closed, up against cockpit wall). The canopy is locked and the pressure seal is inflated.
Canopy Jettison T-Handle
In case of an emergency, the CANOPY JETTISON T-handle provides an
alternate means to separate the canopy from the aircraft. This can be used
if the primary ejection handle is pulled but the canopy fails to separate,
preventing ejection.




DEFOG Lever
The DEFOG lever can be moved forward and back to provide de-fogging to the canopy.
    •    MIN. Most of the airflow is diverted to the vents behind the seat.
    •    MAX. Most of the airflow is diverted to the forward canopy area
         and the air vent at the bottom of the center instrument panel.
              o    When set to the full MAX position with the TEMP knob
                   set to AUTO, the air flow will be set to full warm for 3
                   minutes. Retarding the lever and returning it to MAX will
                   restart this 3-minute period of full warm.
Right Console

              NUCLEAR CONSENT Switch   PLAIN/CIPHER Switch

                                                                                 ENGINE ANTI-ICE Switch
      SEAT ADJ Switch                          Interior LIGHTING Control Panel

                                                        AIR COND Control Panel
                                                                                                                  Utility Light

     HUD Control Panel

                                                                                                              ANT SEL Panel
                                                                                      KY-58 Panel




     SNSR PWR Control Panel                                                                                           DTU Panel


           ZEROIZE Switch                                     Arm Rest                          AVIONICS POWER Panel

                                       VOICE MESSAGE Switch          OXYGEN Regulator Panel



Each text box above may be selected to jump to a more detailed description of that panel. Selecting the image
of the instrument or panel will return the manual back to this page.
The HUD Control Panel is described in a dedicated section following the Hands-On Controls (HOTAS).


SNSR PWR Control Panel
The Sensor Power panel consists of four switches that enable                       1. LEFT HDPT Switch       3. FCR Switch
power to the primary sensors.
1.     LEFT HDPT Switch. Powers the sensor mounted to the left
       “chin” hardpoint. This will normally be the AN/ASQ-213 HARM
       Targeting System (HTS) pod.
2.     RIGHT HDPT Switch. Powers the sensor mounted to the
                                                                                      2. RIGHT HDPT Switch       4. RDR ALT Switch
       right “chin” hardpoint. This will normally be the AN/AAQ-28
       Litening II targeting pod (TGP).
3.     FCR Switch. Powers the AN/APG-68 Fire Control Radar.
4.     RDR ALT Switch. Powers the radar altimeter.
       •      RDR ALT. The radar altimeter is set to transmit.
       •      STBY. The radar altimeter is powered on but will not transmit.
       •      OFF. The radar altimeter is powered off
Interior LIGHTING Control Panel
The Interior Lighting panel consists of five knobs that control     1. PRIMARY –       2. PRIMARY –       3. PRIMARY – DATA
the brightness of the cockpit instruments, switch panel            CONSOLES Knob      INST PNL Knob      ENTRY DISPLAY Knob

backlighting, and flood lights. Most of the lighting is green to
support night vision systems.
1.   PRIMARY – CONSOLES Knob. Controls the
     brightness of the panel backlighting on the left auxiliary
     console, left console and right console.
2.   PRIMARY – INST PNL Knob. Controls the brightness
     of the panel backlighting on the instrument panel and
     right auxiliary console.
3.   PRIMARY – DATA ENTRY DISPLAY Knob. Controls
     the brightness of the DED and PFLD displays.
4.   FLOOD – CONSOLES Knob. Controls the flood light
     intensity on the left auxiliary console, left console and          4. FLOOD –         5. FLOOD –       6. MAL & IND
                                                                      CONSOLES Knob      INST PNL Knob       LTS Switch
     right console.
5.   FLOOD – INST PNL Knob. Controls the flood light intensity on the instrument panel and right auxiliary
     console.
6.   MAL & IND LTS Switch. Sets the malfunction and indicator lights and the CMDS expendable inventory
     counters to either BRT (Bright) or DIM. BRT is automatically selected if the FLOOD – CONSOLES knob is
     moved past the HIGH INT detent, if the PRIMARY – INST PNL knob is rotated fully counterclockwise, or if
     emergency DC power is lost.


AIR COND Control Panel
The Air Conditioning panel controls the environmental control
systems.
1.   TEMP Knob. Controls cockpit temperature. (N/I)
2.   AIR SOURCE Knob. Selects the air source for ventilation of
     the cockpit and avionics. Note that placing the knob in OFF or
     RAM will prevent fuel from being transferred from external
     fuel tanks.                                                            1. TEMP Knob         2. AIR SOURCE Knob

     •    OFF. Closes all engine bleed air valves. All air conditioning and cooling functions cease. Pressurization
          functions are disabled, including G-suit and pressure breathing, OBOGS, canopy seal, and fuel tank
          pressurization.
     •    NORM. Sets environmental control and pressurization systems to automatic operation.
     •    DUMP. Dumps cockpit pressure and uses conditioned bleed air to ventilate the cockpit and avionics.
     •    RAM. Dumps cockpit pressure and closes engine bleed air valves. All air conditioning and cooling
          functions cease. Pressurization functions are disabled, including G-suit and pressure breathing, OBOGS,
          canopy seal, and fuel tank pressurization. Uses external ram air to ventilate cockpit and avionics.
KY-58 Secure Voice Panel
The KY-58 secure voice system is used to provide encryption of
voice communications. (N/I)


PLAIN/CIPHER Switch
                The Plain/Cipher switch toggles between using
                unencrypted or encrypted communications over
                either the UHF or VHF radio. (N/I)




OXYGEN Regulator Panel
The Oxygen Regulator panel controls the flow of O2 to the     1. OXYGEN REGULATOR FLOW      2. OXYGEN SUPPLY Indicator
pilot’s facemask and the oxygen system’s mode of
operation.
1.   OXYGEN REGULATOR FLOW Indicator. Alternates
     between white and black indications. White indicates
     oxygen flow; black indicates no oxygen flow.
2.   OXYGEN SUPPLY Indicator. Indicates oxygen
     pressure, with normal operation between 10 and 55
     PSI.
                                                               3. EMERGENCY Lever   4. Diluter Lever   5. SUPPLY Lever
3.   EMERGENCY Lever. Controls positive pressure mode
     of oxygen supply system. (N/I)
     •    EMERGENCY. Provides maximum amount of oxygen under positive pressure. Used by the pilot to test
          for leaks.
     •    NORMAL. Positive pressure is provided if cockpit pressure altitude exceeds 28,000 feet.
     •    TEST MASK. Provides maximum amount of oxygen under positive pressure. Used by life support
          personnel to test for leaks.
4.   Diluter Lever. Controls the mixture of cockpit air and pure oxygen. (N/I)
     •    100%. Maximum amount of oxygen is provided to the pilot.
     •    NORM. Regulated mix of cockpit air and oxygen is provided to the pilot based on cockpit pressure
          altitude.
5.   SUPPLY Lever. Controls mode of operation for the oxygen supply system. When set to PBG (Pressure
     Breathing for G), the oxygen regulator provides pressure breathing above 4 G’s to enhance G tolerance and
     reduce pilot fatigue.
     •    PBG. Oxygen is supplied to pilot’s facemask. Pressure breathing based on G-force is available.
     •    ON. Oxygen is supplied to pilot’s facemask. Pressure breathing is not available.
     •    OFF. Turns off the oxygen supply to pilot’s facemask.
ANTI ICE & ANT SEL Switches
The engine Anti-Ice system prevents ice buildup within the            1. ANTI-ICE ENGINE Switch         2. ANT SEL – IFF Switch
engine intake and includes an inlet ice detector.
1.   ANTI-ICE ENGINE Switch. Controls automatic or manual
     activation of the inlet anti-ice heating elements, and
     enables/disables the inlet ice detector.
     •    ON. Manually activates the engine anti-ice system and
          inlet strut heater. The inlet ice detector will still                         3. ANT SEL – UHF Switch

          illuminate the INLET ICING caution light on the Caution
          Light panel if ice accumulation is detected.
     •    AUTO. If ice accumulation is detected by the inlet ice detector, the engine anti-ice system and inlet
          strut heater will automatically activate and the INLET ICING caution light will illuminate on the Caution
          Light panel.
     •    OFF. The inlet ice detector, engine anti-ice system, and inlet strut heater are disabled.
The Antenna Select panel is used to select the upper, lower, or both antennas for transmissions from the UHF
radio and IFF system.
2.   ANT SEL – IFF Switch. Selects automatic or manual antenna selection for IFF interrogation replies.
     •    UPPER. Upper IFF antenna is used to receive and reply to IFF interrogation signals.
     •    NORM. The IFF antenna automatically selects which antenna is used to reply to IFF interrogation
          signals based on which antenna is receiving the strongest signal.
     •    LOWER. Lower IFF antenna is used to receive and reply to IFF interrogation signals.
3.   ANT SEL – UHF Switch. Selects single or both UHF antennas for radio transmission.
     •    UPPER. Upper UHF antenna is used to transmit and receive UHF radio signals.
     •    NORM. Both antennas are used to transmit in a cyclic pattern to provide omnidirectional radio
          transmissions.
     •    LOWER. Lower UHF antenna is used to transmit and receive UHF radio signals.


AVIONICS POWER Control Panel
The Avionics Power panel enables/disables                2. ST STA Switch     3. MFD Switch     4. UFC Switch      5. MAP Switch
power to the various avionics systems and
controls the alignment functions of the Inertial
Navigation System (INS).                           1. MMC Switch

1.   MMC Switch. Powers the Modular Mission
     Computer.
2.   ST STA Switch. Powers the underwing
     and fuselage centerline stores stations.
                                                     8. INS Knob
3.   MFD Switch. Powers the two cockpit
     Multi-Function Displays (MFD).
                                                                            6. GPS Switch     7. DL Switch      9. MIDS LVT Knob
4.   UFC Switch. Powers the Upfront Controls
     (ICP and DED).
5.   MAP Switch. Not functional in the Block 50 F-16.
6.   GPS Switch. Powers the GPS receiver.
     NOTE: GPS will only be available if the DCS mission date is 28 March 1994 or later. In addition, GPS precision
     will be degraded unless “USA” is one of the countries assigned to the player’s coalition within the DCS
     mission. However, these limitations may be overridden if both of the following conditions are true:
     •    Unrestricted SATNAV is enabled in the player’s GAMEPLAY options or is enforced as enabled in the
          Mission Options for the mission being played.
     •    Unrestricted SATNAV is not enforced as disabled in the Mission Options for the mission being played.
7.   DL Switch. Powers the Secure Modem Datalink (SMDL). (N/I)
8.   INS Knob. Sets the operating mode of the Inertial Navigation System (INS) and determines the method of
     alignment when necessary. While the INS is performing an alignment on the ground, it is imperative that
     the aircraft is not moved or repositioned in any way, to include reconfiguring externally mounted equipment
     or arming/re-arming weapons stations. (See INS Alignment for more information.)
     •    OFF. Removes power from the INS. The INS knob should remain in this position on aircraft power for
          a minimum of 10 seconds before moving the INS knob from off or shutting down the aircraft.
     •    ALIGN – STOR HDG. Initiates a Stored Heading Alignment of the INS using previous alignment data
          stored within the MMC. This allows the alignment process to be completed more rapidly than a Normal
          Gyrocompass Alignment but requires that the aircraft not be moved after the INS is powered off
          (assuming the INS had a good alignment prior to the power being removed).
     •    ALIGN – NORM. Initiates a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment of the INS from manually entered position
          data. This alignment mode requires more time to complete but allows the aircraft to regain position
          confidence if the aircraft has been repositioned by ground crews since the last time the INS was
          powered and properly aligned.
     •    NAV. Sets the INS to normal navigation functionality after an alignment has been performed
          successfully.
     •    CAL. No function.
     •    IN FLT ALIGN. Initiates an In-Flight Alignment of the INS but requires the pilot to maintain a stable
          attitude on a constant heading while the alignment proceeds. When the INS knob is initially moved to
          IN FLT ALIGN, the INS will automatically enter Attitude mode until a coarse alignment can be
          completed.
     •    ATT. Attitude mode provides pitch, roll, and heading information only and is used as a degraded mode
          of operation when the situation dictates. No navigational information will be available except TACAN.
9.   MIDS LVT Knob. The Multifunctional Information Distribution System (MIDS) knob enables/disables or
     zeroizes the MIDS radio terminal. (See Tactical Net Datalink for more information.)
     •    ZERO. Zeroizes sensitive data within MIDS LVT internal memory.
     •    OFF. Disables power to the MIDS LVT.
     •    ON. Enables power to the MIDS LVT.
VOICE MESSAGE Switch
The Voice Message switch is used to silence all aircraft voice messages when set to INHIBIT. This
is normally only performed when a voice message is repeating in an erroneous manner.




ZEROIZE Switch
In an emergency, the ZEROIZE switch can erase all sensitive data from the systems such as
secure voice encryption, GPS keys, and others.




SEAT ADJ Switch
The Seat Adjustment switch controls an electric
motor that raises or lowers the pilot seat. This                SEAT ADJ Switch
function allows the pilot to ensure their sitting height
corresponds with a comfortable view of the
instrument panel and alignment of their viewpoint
through the HUD. The seat can also be raised during
landing for increased visibility over the nose, if
                                                                NUCLEAR CONSENT Switch
desired.
The switch is spring-loaded to the center “off”
position, and must be held up or down to adjust the
seat height.




NUCLEAR CONSENT Switch
This switch is not implemented.
Ejection Seat Controls

Ejection Handle
The Ejection Handle is pulled to
initiate the ejection sequence in an
emergency where continued flight or
a safe landing is no longer possible
or is in doubt. Pulling the handle
jettisons the canopy, followed by
igniting a rocket motor mounted to
the seat, expelling the seat itself
along with the pilot to descend to the
surface under a parachute.
The ejection handle itself is not
implemented in DCS: F-16C. The                                         Ejection Handle
ejection sequence can be initiated by
pressing [LCtrl]+[E].


Ejection Seat Arming Lever
The Ejection Seat Arming lever arms the Ejection Handle and
associated mechanisms for performing an ejection from the cockpit                          Ejection Seat Arming
                                                                                         Lever (Disarmed position)
in an emergency.
When the handle is placed in the upright position, the ejection seat
is disarmed, and the SEAT NOT ARMED caution light illuminates on
the Caution Light Panel.
When the handle is rotated aft and down so that it is flush with the
ejection seat surface, the ejection seat is armed and the SEAT NOT
ARMED caution light extinguishes.




                                                                                          Ejection Seat Arming
                                                                                         Lever (Armed position)
Emergency Manual Chute Lever
The Emergency Manual Chute lever allows the pilot to
manually initiate seat separation and deployment of
his/her parachute following an ejection sequence. (N/I)
This may be necessary if the separation and deployment
                                                            EMERGENCY MANUAL
sequence does not initiate automatically or malfunctions.      CHUTE Lever
HANDS-ON CONTROLS (HOTAS)
The Hands-On Controls, sometimes referred to as Hands on Throttle and Stick (HOTAS), allows the pilot to
interact with the fire control system and various weapons delivery functions without taking his or her hands off
the flight controls. Some of these switches are multipurpose and their function at any given time depends upon
the aircraft master mode, weapons delivery mode, and/or the selected Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI).
Visual diagrams of the Hands-On Control functions based on Master Mode/SOI may be viewed in Appendix D.


Side Stick Controller (SSC)
The primary function of the Side Stick Controller is to provide pitch and roll commands to maneuver the aircraft.
Pushing/pulling on the SSC affects aircraft pitch (moves the horizontal tails) and moving the SSC left/right affects
roll (moves the wing trailing edge flaperons and horizontal tails; and to a lesser extent, the vertical rudder).
The SSC has several buttons and multi-position switches that permit manipulation of the key systems.

         1. Weapon Release Button                       2. Trim Switch (4-way)




            5. Target Management                        6. Display Management
                Switch (4-way)                              Switch (4-way)

                                                                                          4. Missile Step Button

            3. Trigger (2-position)



               7. Countermeasures
            Management Switch (4-way)



            8. Paddle Switch



            9. Expand/FOV Button




1.   Weapon Release Button. Press and hold to fire air-to-air missiles or release any air-to-ground munition.
2.   Trim Switch. Positioning the button forward and aft trims the aircraft nose up (Trim switch aft) and nose
     down (Trim switch forward). Positioning the button left and right trims the aircraft left wing down and right
     wing down respectively.
3.   Trigger. Squeezing to the first detent fires the laser designator for accurate ranging if a targeting pod is
     equipped and in Air-to-Ground (A-G) mode. Squeezing the trigger to the second detent fires the gun if
     selected and armed.
4.   Missile Step Button. This button has different functions depending on the state of the aircraft.
     •     Nose-wheel Steering. On the ground, momentarily pressing the button activates nosewheel steering
           via the rudder pedals. Pressing the button a second time disables nosewheel steering.
      •    AR Disconnect. When in flight and the AIR REFUEL switch is in the OPEN position, pressing the button
           manually disconnects the refueling boom from the aircraft’s dorsal refueling receptacle.
      •    Missile Step. When in flight and in Air-to-Air, Missile Override or Dogfight modes, a short press (<0.5
           sec) will select the next missile station of that type, and a long press (>0.5 sec) will cycle to the next
           missile type. When in flight and in Air-to-Ground (A-G) mode, a short press cycles between CCIP, DTOS
           and CCRP modes; or selects the next missile station if AGM-65 or AGM-88 is selected on the SMS page.
                                                  MSL ORIDE                                        A-G MODE        A-G MODE
     ACTION        NAV MODE      A-A MODE                          DGFT MODE      A-G MODE
                                                    MODE                                           (AGM-65)        (AGM-88)
           Air                                                                    CCIP→DTOS
                   (No Action)                    Missile Step                                            Missile Step
          Short                                                                     →CCRP
           Air
 MSL               (No Action)                 Cycle Missile Type                                  (No Action)
          Long
 STEP      Air
          Refuel
                                                  Manually Disconnect Aerial Refueling Boom

          Ground                                Engage/Disengage Nosewheel Steering (NWS)


5.    Target Management Switch (TMS). The TMS controls target designation and data management for the
      selected Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI). Short press duration is <0.5 second; long press duration is >0.5 second.
      The exception to the long press duration is TWS/RWS Swap or TDOA, which requires a full 1 second press.

     ACTION         HUD SOI      HMCS SOI          FCR SOI           HSD SOI        HAD SOI         TGP SOI        WPN SOI
                    DTOS/VIS                       Designate /                                    Point Track /   Track / Force
          Short                   Designate                         Designate      Designate
                    Designate                      ACM BORE                                       MAV Handoff       Correlate
 FWD
                                                 RWS Spotlight
          Long     SOI to HMCS   (No Action)                                              (No Action)
                                                  (Continuous)
                                                                                                    TV/FLIR/      HARM Table /
          Short           (No Action)            Interrogate All    (No Action)   DED to SEAD
                                                                                                  FLIR Polarity   MAV Polarity
 LEFT
                                                Interrogate                       Initiate TDOA
          Long            (No Action)                               (No Action)                           (No Action)
                                                  Target                               (1 sec)
                *Sighting Point                Target step /                                      Area Track / HARM Target
          Short                   (No Action)                       (No Action)   Target Step
                    Rotary                     ACM HUD / *                                        MAV Handoff     Step
RIGHT
                                                TWS/RWS
          Long            (No Action)                                                     (No Action)
                                               Swap (1 sec)
                                Target Reject Target Reject /          Drop       Target Reject   Slave Mode / Target Reject /
          Short Target Reject
                                / SOI to HUD    ACM VERT            Designation   / DED to CNI    Cursor Zero   MAV Slave
 AFT
          Long                                                      (No Action)

* When sighting point options are available in Air-to-Ground (A-G) master mode, pressing TMS Right while the
HUD or FCR is set as SOI will cycle through the available sighting points.

6.    Display Management Switch (DMS). The DMS is used to control Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI) selection.
      Short press duration is <0.5 second; long press duration is >0.5 second.

     ACTION         HUD SOI      HMCS SOI          FCR SOI           HSD SOI        HAD SOI         TGP SOI        WPN SOI

          Short           (No Action)                                             SOI to HUD
 FWD
          Long                                                      (No Action)

          Short                                             Cycle Left MFD Format
 LEFT
          Long                                                      (No Action)

          Short                                             Cycle Right MFD Format
RIGHT
          Long                                                      (No Action)

          Short           SOI to MFD                                        Swap SOI between MFDs
 AFT
          Long                                            Helmet Display Unit On/Off
7.    Countermeasures Management Switch (CMS). The CMS controls deployment of countermeasures and
      operation of the ECM pod, if installed. (See Defensive Systems for more information.)

     ACTION                                         COUNTERMEASURE FUNCTION

 FWD      ALL                     Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4 (as selected by CMDS PRGM knob)

 LEFT     ALL                                        Dispense 1x Manual Program 6

          MAN                                          Deactivate ECM Emissions

RIGHT    SEMI                                            Disable ECM Emissions

         AUTO                  Disable Dispensing of Auto Program / Interrupt Dispensing of current Program

          MAN                                    Activate ECM Emissions if set to Mode 3

 AFT     SEMI                   Dispense 1x Auto Program / Enables ECM Emissions if set to Mode 1 or 2

         AUTO                                Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Program


8.    Paddle Switch. Momentarily disengages the autopilot for the duration that the switch is pressed and held,
      allowing the pilot to manually maneuver the aircraft as necessary. When released, the autopilot will attempt
      to capture new reference values of pitch, roll, and/or altitude, depending on the autopilot modes that have
      been selected using the PITCH and ROLL switches on the MISC panel. (See Autopilot for more information.)
9.    Expand/FOV Button. Pressing this button cycles through the available fields-of-view for the sensor or
      system that is currently selected as SOI.

     ACTION       HUD SOI       HMCS SOI         FCR SOI        HSD SOI        HAD SOI         TGP SOI        WPN SOI
                                               Cycle FCR       Cycle HSD      Cycle HAD       Toggle TGP   Toggle AGM
EXP/     Short           (No Action)
                                               EXP Modes       EXP Modes      EXP Modes      Field-Of-View Field-Of-View
 FOV
DEPR     Long                                    HSD ZOOM Mode (for duration of press)
Throttle
The engine is controlled by a throttle mounted above the left console with detents at OFF, IDLE, MIL, and MAX
AB. The OFF position terminates engine ignition and fuel flow. The IDLE position commands minimum thrust and
is used for all ground starts and air starts. From IDLE to MIL, the throttle controls the output of the engine.
Forward of the MIL position, the throttle controls the operation of the afterburner.
The throttle has several multi-position switches and knobs that permit manipulation of the key systems. As with
the Side Stick Controller, the Hands-On Controls functions on the throttle vary in functionality depending on the
state and operational modes of the aircraft.

                                              Throttle Cutoff Release      1. UHF VHF Transmit Switch (4-way)


                                                                                                     2. MAN RNG/UNCAGE Knob
                                                                                                         (Rotate, Depress)




                                                                                                      3. DOG FIGHT
                                                                                                     Switch (3-position)




                                                                                                      4. ANT ELEV Knob
                                                                                                    (Rotate, Center Detent)
                               5. RDR CURSOR/ENABLE Switch
                                  (Multi-directional, Depress)
                                                                                 6. SPD BRK Switch
                                                                             (3-position, Aft-Momentary)




1.      UHF VHF Transmit Switch. The switch initiates UHF (aft) and VHF (forward) radio transmissions. Pressing
        IFF IN (right/inboard) or IFF OUT (left/outboard) using short presses (<0.5 sec) controls datalink filters on
        the FCR. Pressing inboard with long presses (>0.5 sec) controls transmissions to Flight/Team members over
        the selected datalink.

         ACTION                                                     DATALINK FUNCTION

                Short                                       Toggle Datalink Information on FCR
    LEFT
 (IFF OUT)      Long                                                     (No Action)

                Short                                            Cycle Datalink Filters on FCR
      RIGHT
     (IFF IN)
                Long                       Transmit selected Steerpoint, SPI, or SEAD Target over Datalink


2.      MAN RNG/UNCAGE Control. The Manual Range/Uncage knob has different functions depending on the
        master mode and selected system. Rotating the knob controls manual zoom level for targeting pod video.
        Depressing the control commands the AIM-9 or AGM-65 seeker to uncage, the TGP to enter/exit LSS mode,
        or declutters the HUD when landing. When the aircraft is airborne with the landing gear down, depressing
        UNCAGE will remove the Roll Indicator and ILS Bars from the HUD and re-position the Heading Scale to the
        top portion of the HUD.

 ACTION             NAV MODE (LG DOWN)                  AAM / DGFT MODE (SMS AIM-9)                   TGP A-G MODE (TGP SOI)
                   Declutter ILS Deviation Bars
DEPRESS                                                          Uncage AIM-9 Seeker                   Toggle Laser Spot Search
                   and Roll Indicator from HUD
3.    DOG FIGHT Switch. The Dogfight/Missile Override switch is a three-position switch that overrides any
      mode except emergency jettison. Returning the switch to the center returns to the last selected Master
      Mode.
      •     Dogfight (outboard). This position will automatically select ACM radar mode, but the radar will go
            to standby until commanded to transmit. The HUD will display symbology for 20mm gun engagement
            along with the targeting reticles for AIM-9 or AIM-120, depending on which missile is selected. “DGFT”
            is displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status.
      •     Missile Override (inboard). This position will automatically select RWS radar mode and display HUD
            symbology for A-A missile delivery. Gun will be unavailable for selection. “MRM”, “SRM” or “HOB” will
            be displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status, depending on which missile type is selected. If no air-to-
            air missiles have been loaded, “MSL” is displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status.
4.    ANT ELEV Knob. The Antenna Elevation knob is used to manually set the radar antenna elevation angle.
5.    RDR CURSOR/ENABLE Control. Used for slewing the cursor on the FCR, HSD, and HAD pages; the cursor
      on the WPN page when AGM-88 is selected in HAS mode; slewing the TGP sensor; or slewing the AGM-65
      seeker. When in A-A master mode, pressing and holding this control swaps the BORE/SLAVE option for the
      AIM-9 missiles while the control is depressed. When in A-G master mode with AGM-65 missiles selected,
      pressing this control will step through PRE/VIS/BORE mode options.
                                                                                        WPN SOI       WPN SOI
 ACTION              HUD / HMCS SOI              FCR / HSD / HAD SOI        TGP SOI
                                                                                        (AGM-88)      (AGM-65)
                                                                            Slew TGP    Slew HAS      Slew MAV
     SLEW         Slew TD Box / Mark Cue           Slew MFD Cursor
                                                                             Sensor       Cursor       Seeker
 ACTION              A-A MODE              MSL ORIDE MODE              DGFT MODE       A-G MODE (SMS AGM-65)

DEPRESS                     Swap AIM-9 BORE/SLAVE (for duration of press)                  PRE→VIS→BORE


6.    SPD BRK Switch. The aft position extends the speedbrakes and the forward position retracts the
      speedbrakes, with the switch spring-loaded out of the aft position back to center. Extension and retraction
      movement occurs for as long as the SPD BRK switch is held in either position, allowing the speedbrakes to
      be stopped at any intermediate position as desired.

      The speedbrakes may be fully extended to 60° when the right main landing gear is not down and locked.
      When the right main landing gear is down and locked, the speedbrakes are limited to 43° to prevent the
      lower speedbrake surfaces from striking the ground upon landing. This limitation may be temporarily
      overridden by holding the SPD BRK switch to the aft position. When the nose landing gear compresses after
      landing, the speedbrakes may once again be fully opened without needing to hold the SPD BRK switch aft.
                 Side Stick Controller (SSC) Hands-On Control Functions
                                                 MSL ORIDE                                        A-G MODE         A-G MODE
   ACTION        NAV MODE        A-A MODE                         DGFT MODE       A-G MODE
                                                   MODE                                           (AGM-65)         (AGM-88)
         Air                                                                     CCIP→DTOS
                 (No Action)                     Missile Step                                             Missile Step
        Short                                                                      →CCRP
         Air
MSL     Long     (No Action)               Cycle A-A Missile Type                                  (No Action)
STEP     Air
        Refuel                                   Manually Disconnect Aerial Refueling Boom

        Ground                                 Engage/Disengage Nosewheel Steering (NWS)

   ACTION         HUD SOI        HMCS SOI         FCR SOI          HSD SOI         HAD SOI          TGP SOI         WPN SOI

        Short            (No Action)                                              SOI to HUD
DMS
FWD
        Long                                                      (No Action)

        Short                                               Next Left MFD Format
DMS
LEFT
        Long                                                      (No Action)

        Short                                              Next Right MFD Format
 DMS
RIGHT
        Long                                                      (No Action)

        Short           SOI to MFD                                        Swap SOI between MFDs
DMS
AFT
        Long                                             Helmet Display Unit On/Off
                  DTOS/VIS                       Designate /                                     Point Track /    Track / Force
        Short                    Designate                         Designate       Designate
TMS               Designate                      ACM BORE                                        MAV Handoff        Correlate
FWD                                            RWS Spotlight
        Long     SOI to HMCS     (No Action)                                              (No Action)
                                                (Continuous)
                                                                                                    TV/FLIR/    HARM Table /
        Short            (No Action)            Interrogate All   (No Action)    DED to SEAD
TMS                                                                                               FLIR Polarity MAV Polarity
LEFT                                        Interrogate                          Initiate TDOA
        Long             (No Action)                              (No Action)                              (No Action)
                                              Target                                  (1 sec)
            *Sighting Point                Target step /                                         Area Track / HARM Target
      Short                   (No Action)                         (No Action)     Target Step
 TMS            Rotary                     ACM HUD / *                                           MAV Handoff     Step
RIGHT                                       TWS/RWS
      Long            (No Action)                                                         (No Action)
                                           Swap (1 sec)
                            Target Reject Target Reject /            Drop        Target Reject    Slave Mode / Target Reject /
      Short Target Reject
 TMS                        / SOI to HUD    ACM VERT              Designation    / DED to CNI     Cursor Zero   MAV Slave
 AFT
      Long                                                        (No Action)
CMS
         ALL                       Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4 (as selected by CMDS PRGM knob)
FWD
CMS
         ALL                                           Dispense 1x Manual Program 6
LEFT
        MAN                                              Deactivate ECM Emissions
 CMS
        SEMI                                               Disable ECM Emissions
RIGHT
        AUTO                   Disable Dispensing of Auto Program / Interrupt Dispensing of current Program

        MAN                                       Activate ECM Emissions if set to Mode 3
CMS
        SEMI                     Dispense 1x Auto Program / Enables ECM Emissions if set to Mode 1 or 2
AFT
        AUTO                                   Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Program
                                                 Cycle FCR        Cycle HSD       Cycle HAD       Toggle TGP   Toggle AGM
        Short            (No Action)
EXP/                                             EXP Modes        EXP Modes       EXP Modes      Field-Of-View Field-Of-View
FOV
        Long                                      HSD ZOOM Mode (for duration of press)
  PADDLE
                    Interrupts Autopilot authority to the flight controls / Sets new Autopilot reference values upon release
  SWITCH
                           Throttle Grip Hands-On Control Functions
                                                                                              WPN SOI      WPN SOI
   ACTION            HUD / HMCS SOI                 FCR / HSD / HAD SOI           TGP SOI
                                                                                              (AGM-88)     (AGM-65)
RDR CURSOR                                                                      Slew TGP      Slew HAS     Slew MAV
                 Slew TD Box / Mark Cue               Slew MFD Cursor
   SLEW                                                                          Sensor         Cursor      Seeker
   ACTION            A-A MODE              MSL ORIDE MODE                 DGFT MODE          A-G MODE (SMS AGM-65)
   ENABLE
                            Swap AIM-9 BORE/SLAVE (for duration of press)                       PRE→VIS→BORE
  DEPRESS
   ACTION                                                       COMMAND
   UHF VHF
                                                  Transmit over ARC-222 VHF-AM/FM Radio
    FWD
   UHF VHF
                                                   Transmit over ARC-164 UHF-AM Radio
     AFT
 UHF    Short                                        Toggle Datalink Information on FCR
 VHF
 LEFT   Long                                                     (No Action)

 UHF    Short                                           Cycle Datalink Filters on FCR
 VHF
RIGHT   Long                        Transmit selected Steerpoint, SPI, or SEAD Target over Datalink

SPD BRK FWD                                                Retract Speed Brakes

SPD BRK CTR                                         Hold Speed Brakes in current position

SPD BRK AFT                                                Extend Speed Brakes
  DOG FIGHT
                              Enter DOGFIGHT Master Mode, set FCR Mode to ACM, set FCR to Standby
   UP (OUT)
  DOG FIGHT
                Revert Master Mode to previous Master Mode/Sub-mode prior to entering DOGFIGHT/MISSILE OVERRIDE
     CTR
  DOG FIGHT
                          Enter MISSILE OVERRIDE Mode, set FCR Mode to CRM, set FCR Sub-mode to RWS
  DOWN (IN)
  ANT ELEV
                                                  Increase/Decrease FCR Antenna Elevation
   ROTATE
   MAN RNG
                                              Increase/Decrease TGP Manual Zoom Level
   ROTATE
   ACTION           NAV MODE (LG DOWN)                 AAM / DGFT MODE (SMS AIM-9)          TGP A-G MODE (TGP SOI)
  UNCAGE           Declutter ILS Deviation Bars
                                                             Uncage AIM-9 Seeker            Toggle Laser Spot Search
  DEPRESS          and Roll Indicator from HUD


Visual diagrams of the Hands-On Control functions based on Master Mode/SOI may be viewed in Appendix D.
HEADS-UP DISPLAY (HUD)
The Heads-Up Display, or HUD, is one of the most important instruments and provides valuable information
regarding aircraft flight performance, navigation, targeting, and visual cues for weapons employment. All
information is displayed on a combining glass mounted in the forward field-of-view at eye level. The display
surface field of view is 25° in diameter and extends down to a line 10.5° below the field-of-view center, with the
symbology focused at infinity and superimposed upon the outside world along the flightpath of the aircraft.

            1. Great Circle Steering Cue
                                                                                     11. Attitude Bars
                            2. Current G
                                                                                     12. Boresight Cross
                    3. Diamond Symbol
                                                                                     13. Flight Path Marker
                         4. Horizon Line

             5. Velocity & Velocity Scale                                            14. Altitude & Altitude Scale

                   6. Master Arm Status                                              15. Radar Altitude

                        7. Mach Number                                               16. Altitude Low Setting

                          8. Maximum G                                               17. Slant Range

                 9. Master Mode Status                                               18. Time To Go

                 10. Ownship Bearing &                                               19. Distance to Steerpoint/
                 Distance from Bullseye                                                  Steerpoint Number
                                            20. Roll Indicator   21. Heading Scale




Some elements of the HUD symbology are always present, others will be displayed or removed based on the
selected master mode, available sensor(s), or weapon profile; and some elements can be optionally displayed or
removed based on pilot preference. (See HUD Control Panel for more information.)


HUD Symbology Elements
1.   Great Circle Steering Cue. Provides a lateral steering indication to the selected steerpoint. The steering
     cue functions using the great circle method, in that the most direct route across a 3-dimensional sphere is
     used to determine the course to the destination instead of a fixed heading across a 2-dimensional surface.
     The line extending from the cue indicates the relative bearing of the selected steerpoint from the nose. If
     the line is pointed to the 12 o’clock, the steerpoint is directly ahead. If the line is pointed to the 3 or 9
     o’clock, the steerpoint is 90 to the right or left respectively. If the line is pointed to the 6 o’clock, the
     steerpoint is behind the aircraft. (See Navigation by Steerpoints for more information.)
2.   Current G. Displays the current aircraft G-load value. The G value is displayed to the nearest tenth of a G,
     and ranges from +9.9 to -9.9 G’s.
3.   Diamond Symbol. Displays the 3-dimensional position of the selected steerpoint, in both position and
     altitude. When the Diamond Symbol is out of the HUD field-of-view an X is superimposed across the symbol.
     (See Navigation by Steerpoints for more information.)
4.   Horizon Line. The Horizon Line is an element of the Attitude Bars that indicates 0° pitch, relative to the
     Boresight Cross.
5.   Velocity & Velocity Scale. Velocity is displayed in knots, between 60 to 900 knots CAS. When below 60
     knots CAS, the HUD will display 0 knots. Each major tick mark on the Velocity Scale represents 50 knots and
     is accompanied by a 2-digit label, and each minor tick mark represents 10 knots.
     The Velocity may be set to calibrated airspeed (CAS), true airspeed (TAS), or ground speed (GND SPD)
     using the Velocity Switch on the HUD Control Panel. A “C” is displayed to the right of the Velocity Scale
     when set to calibrated airspeed, a “T” is displayed when set to true airspeed, and a “G” is displayed when
     set to ground speed. The Velocity Scale will automatically revert to calibrated airspeed if in Dogfight mode
     or if the landing gear is deployed.
6.   Master Arm Status. Displays the position of the MASTER ARM Switch on the MISC panel.
     •    ARM. The MASTER ARM Switch is in the MASTER ARM position.
     •    (Blank). No text is displayed if the MASTER ARM Switch is in the OFF position.
     •    SIM. The MASTER ARM Switch is in the SIMULATE position.
7.   Mach Number. Displays the current Mach number to the hundredths value.
8.   Maximum G. Displays the maximum G-loading measured during the flight. This value may be reset to 1.0
     by momentarily placing the Drift Cut-Out/Warning Reset switch on the ICP to the WARN RESET position.
9.   Master Mode Status. Displays the current master mode or sub-mode.
     •    NAV. Navigation master mode.                        •    CCIP. Continuously Computed Impact Point
                                                                   weapon delivery sub-mode while in A-G
     •    AAM. Air-to-Air Missile master mode with no              master mode.
          missile type selected.
                                                              •    CCRP. Continuously Computed Release Point
     •    MSL. Missile Override mode with no missile               weapon delivery sub-mode while in A-G
          type selected.                                           master mode.
     •    DGFT. Dogfight master mode.                         •    DTOS. Dive/Toss weapon delivery sub-mode
     •    MRM. Medium Range Missile type selected                  while in A-G master mode.
          (AIM-120B/C) while in AAM or MSL master             •    LADD. Low Altitude Drogue Delivery weapon
          modes.                                                   delivery sub-mode while in A-G master mode.
     •    SRM. Short Range Missile type selected              •    MAN. Manual weapon delivery sub-mode for
          (AIM-9L/M/P/P3/P5) while in AAM or MSL                   manual bomb delivery while in A-G master
          master modes.                                            mode.
     •    HOB. High-Angle Off-Boresight missile type          •    VIS. Visual weapon delivery sub-mode for
          selected (AIM-9X) while in AAM or MSL                    employing AGM-65 (EO-VIS) or JDAM (VIS)
          master modes.                                            while in A-G master mode; or when the HUD
     •    EEGS. Enhanced Envelope Gun Sight for                    Mark Cue is active.
          employing the 20mm M61 rotary cannon                •    PRE. Pre-planned weapon delivery sub-mode
          while in AAM or MSL master modes.                        for employing AGM-65 (EO-PRE) or JDAM
     •    JETT. Selective Jettison     or   Emergency              (PRE) while in A-G master mode.
          Jettison master modes.                              •    BORE. Boresight weapon delivery sub-mode
     •    HARM. HARM Missile designation sub-mode                  for employing AGM-65 while in A-G master
          while in A-G master mode.                                mode.

     •    HTS. HARM Targeting System designation              •    STRF. Strafe weapon delivery sub-mode for
          sub-mode while in A-G master mode.                       employing the 20mm M61 rotary cannon
                                                                   while in A-G master mode.
10. Ownship Bearing & Distance from Bullseye. Displays the azimuth and distance as measured from the
    Bullseye location to the aircraft.
     The Ownship Bearing & Distance from Bullseye can be toggles using the BULL DED page.
11. Attitude Bars. A series of horizontal bars
12. (including the Horizon Line) spaced at 5° intervals to indicate aircraft pitch attitude, relative to the Boresight
    Cross. At pitch angles greater than 60, the attitude bar intervals are spaced at 10 intervals. Positive pitch
    angles are indicated by a solid attitude bar, and negative pitch angles are indicated by a dashed bar. Each
    bar includes a small line along the outside pointing toward the Horizon Line.
     The Attitude Bars are caged to the Flight Path Marker in azimuth, which may occur in high crosswinds or
     lateral drift. The Drift Cut-Out/Warning Reset switch on the ICP can be used to cage the Attitude Bars and
     FPM to the center of the HUD when set to the DRIFT C/O position.
13. Boresight Cross. The Boresight Cross is displayed in all master modes and represents the fuselage
    reference line.
14. Flight Path Marker. The Flight Path Marker (FPM) consists of a circle with three lines extending outward
    from the circumference at the 12, 3, and 9 o’clock positions. The FPM indicates the aircraft inertial velocity
    vector.
     When the FPM is out of the HUD field-of-view, which may occur in high crosswinds, lateral drift or high
     angles-of-attack, an X is superimposed across the symbol. The Drift Cut-Out/Warning Reset switch on the
     ICP can be used to cage the Attitude Bars and FPM to the center of the HUD when set to the DRIFT C/O
     position.
     When in Air-to-Ground mode, the FPM will flash when a weapon is released.
15. Altitude & Altitude Scale. The Altitude & Altitude Scale is in feet, to the nearest 10 feet. Each major tick
    mark on the Altitude Scale represents 500 feet and is accompanied by a 2-digit label, and each minor tick
    mark represents 100 feet.
16. Radar Altitude. The Radar Altitude is displayed within a box marked by an “R”, to the nearest 10 feet. If
    the radar altimeter is set to standby or is otherwise not transmitting, the display will be blank.
17. Altitude Low Setting. Displays the current CARA ALOW setting in feet. When the radar altimeter indicates
    an altitude less than this setting, this data field will flash and will be accompanied by an
    “ALTITUDE…ALTITUDE” voice message alert.
18. Slant Range. The Slant Range is the direct, straight-line distance from the aircraft to the current target or
    SPI location. For range values greater than 1.0 NM, the range is displayed as a four-digit value to the nearest
    tenth of a nautical mile (i.e., 15.2 NM is displayed as “015.2”). For range values less than 1.0 NM, the range
    value is displayed as a three-digit value to the nearest hundred feet (i.e., 5500 feet is displayed as “055”).
    The letter on the left of the display indicates the method the range is determined.
     •    B. The slant range is determined based on the barometric altitude and steerpoint elevation.
     •    R. The slant range is determined based on the radar altimeter.
     •    F. The slant range is determined based on ranging data from the FCR.
     •    M. A Manual range is being used in an air-to-air mode or in air-to-ground CCIP mode.
19. Time to Go. Displays the time that is estimated to elapse before arriving at the selected steerpoint, based
    on the current ground speed. (See Navigation by Steerpoints for more information.)
20. Distance to Steerpoint/Steerpoint Number. The distance to the selected steerpoint is displayed to the
    left of the chevron in 1 nautical mile increments. The selected steerpoint number is displayed to the right of
    the chevron. (See Navigation by Steerpoints for more information.)
21. Roll Indicator. The Roll Indicator consists of increment marks at 0°, 10°, 20°, 30° and 45° bank angles.
    As the aircraft rolls in either direction, the caret symbol will rotate along the indicator arc to indicate the
    current bank angle.
22. Heading Scale. The Heading Scale indicates the magnetic heading of the aircraft. A fixed lubber line along
    the top of the scale and a digital readout below the scale displays the magnetic heading. Each major tick
    mark on the tape represents 10° of magnetic heading and is accompanied by a 2-digit label, and each minor
    tick mark represents 5° of magnetic heading.
     When the Velocity Scale is set to ground speed, a triangle symbol is presented along the Heading Scale
     indicating the aircraft’s course track across the ground.
23. Bank Angle Indicator. The Bank Angle Indicator consists of increment marks at 15°, 30°,
    45°, and 60° bank angles. The increment marks are caged to the Flight Path Marker and
    the FPM wings are used as indicators of the bank angle.
     The Bank Angle Indicator is displayed in place of the Roll Indicator and is only displayed in
     NAV master mode and when the Scales Switch is in the VV/VAH position on the HUD Control
     Panel.
24. Vertical Velocity Scale. The Vertical Velocity Scale is displayed to the left of the Altitude
    Scale when in NAV master mode. Each major tick mark on the Vertical Velocity Scale
    represents 1000 feet per minute, and each minor tick mark represents 500 feet per minute.
     The Vertical Velocity Scale is only displayed in NAV master mode and when the Scales
     Switch is in the VV/VAH position on the HUD Control Panel.
25. Manual Bombing Reticle. The Manual Bombing Reticle is displayed using the
    Primary or Secondary reticle patterns. Using the RET DEPR knob on the ICP,
    the reticle can be positioned vertically from 0 to -260 mils with respect to the
    Boresight Cross, and it is fixed horizontally on the HUD center line and not wind-
    corrected.
     •    Primary Reticle. The primary reticle consists of a 2-milliradian dot
          surrounded by a dashed 50-milliradian inner circle and a solid 100-
          milliradian dotted outer circle.                                                 Reticle Depression Setting

     •    Secondary Reticle. The secondary reticle consists of a 2-milliradian dot
          surrounded by dotted 50-milliradian inner circle and a dotted 100-
          milliradian outer circle. Four 6-milliradian tick marks are positioned along
          the outer circle marking the 12, 3, 6, and 9 o’clock locations.
     •    Manual Reticle Depression Setting. Indicates the current reticle
          depression setting of the Manual Bombing Reticle, as set by the RET DEPR
          knob on the ICP.
Additional HUD symbology elements associated with the various sensors and weapons are described in the
applicable chapters of this manual.
HUD Control Panel
The HUD Control Panel provides the pilot with the ability
to tailor which HUD symbology elements are displayed at
any given time to suit the current mission, situation, or
personal preference.
In Navigation master mode, with no targets being tracked
by the FCR, the HUD can be de-cluttered as shown in the
image to the right.

                     2. Flightpath        3. DED/PFLD     4. Depressible
  1. Scales Switch   Marker Switch           Switch       Reticle Switch




                                                                                    Roll Indicator




5. Velocity Switch   6. Altitude Switch      7. Brightness     8. Test Switch
                                             Control Switch




1.   Scales Switch. Enables/disables the display of
     analog scales for primary flight data.                                       Bank Angle Indicator          Vertical Velocity Scale

     •      VV/VAH. Vertical Velocity, Velocity, Altitude,
                                                                                Velocity Scale                             Altitude Scale
            and Heading scales are displayed. If the Flight
            Path Marker (FPM) is displayed, the Roll
            Indicator is removed and the Bank Angle
            Indicator is placed around the FPM.
     •      VAH. Velocity, Altitude and Heading scales are
            displayed. The Vertical Velocity scale is removed.
     •      OFF. Removes all scales, leaving only the digital
            readouts for velocity, altitude, and heading.
                                                                                                     Heading Scale
2.   Flightpath Marker Switch. Enables/disables the
     display of attitude and flight path information.
     •   ATT/FPM. Displays the Attitude Bars (horizon       Steering Cue
         line and pitch ladder), the Flight Path Marker
         (FPM), and the Steering Cue                                            Attitude Bars

     •   FPM. Displays the Flight Path Marker and
         Steering Cue. The Attitude Bars are removed.
                                                           Flight Path Marker
     •   OFF. The Attitude Bars, Flight Path Marker, and
         Steering Cue are removed.




3.   DED/PFLD Switch. Enables/disables the display of
     PFLD or DED information in the lower portion of the
     HUD.
     •   DED DATA. Removes the Roll Indicator and
         displays a data repeater of the DED.
     •   PFL. Removes the Roll Indicator and displays a
         data repeater of the Pilot Fault List Display
         (PFLD).
     •   OFF. Displays the Roll Indicator.


                                                           DED Data
4.   Depressible Reticle Switch. Controls the display of
     the Manual Bombing Reticles and Manual Reticle
                                                              Primary Reticle
     Depression Setting.
     •    STBY. Displays the Standby Reticle and Manual
          Reticle Depression Setting. Removes all other
          HUD elements.
     •    PRI. Displays the Primary Reticle and Manual
          Reticle Depression Setting. All HUD symbology
          elements are retained.
     •    OFF. Removes the Primary/Standby Reticle and
          the Manual Reticle Depression Setting.
                                                                Manual Reticle
                                                              Depression Setting




5.   Velocity Switch. Controls the velocity scale
     displayed in the HUD. The velocity selection indicator
     is only displayed when the Scales switch is in the
                                                              Velocity Selection Indicator
     VV/VAH or VAH positions.
     •    CAS. Displays calibrated airspeed, indicated by
          a “C” next to the Velocity Scale. The HUD will
          automatically revert to CAS if in Dogfight mode
          or if the landing gear are down.
     •    TAS. Displays true airspeed, indicated by a “T”
          next to the Velocity Scale.
     •    GS. Displays ground speed, indicated by a “G”
          next to the Velocity Scale. The Heading Scale, if
          shown, will display the current ground track of
          the aircraft, indicated by an inverted triangle
          symbol along the top of the Heading Scale.
6.   Altitude Switch. (N/I)
7.   Brightness Control Switch. Controls HUD brightness intensity automatically or manually.
     •   DAY. HUD brightness is manually selected to day intensity level.
     •   AUTO BRT. HUD brightness is automatically adjusted based on ambient light levels. (N/I)
     •   NIGHT. HUD brightness is manually selected to night intensity level.
8.   Test Switch. (N/I)
UPFRONT CONTROLS (UFC)
The Upfront Controls (UFC) include the Integrated Control Panel (ICP) and the Data Entry Display (DED). These
components provide a method of quick access for navigation control, communications, fire control system modes,
and data entry throughout the mission. The most commonly used functions are available on the ICP itself; but
less frequently used functions, such as power and audio volume, are located on console panels.
Data accessed through the ICP is displayed on the DED.




             Integrated Control Panel (ICP)




                                                                               Data Entry Display (DED)




The Upfront Controls are available when the C & I knob is set
to the UFC position on the IFF control panel. During normal
operations, the Upfront Controls are used for various data
entry and system management functions of communications,
navigation, and IFF. In the event there is a failure with the
Upfront Controls, the C & I knob can be set to the BACK UP
position, which allows control of the UHF radio and IFF through
the use of the UHF Backup panel and the IFF control panel.
Note that even when the C & I knob is set to the UFC position,
the MASTER knob on the IFF control panel is still used to
enable/disable operation of the APX-113 Advanced IFF
transponder/interrogator system.
Integrated Control Panel (ICP)
The Integrated Control Panel fills the top center portion of the instrument panel and is one of the core components
for interfacing with the communications, navigation, and IFF systems (also called CNI) of the F-16C. In addition
to the CNI-related functions, the ICP provides master mode selection, controls for manipulating and entering data
into the DED, and HUD symbology brightness control.
                                              1. Override Buttons         2. Master Mode Buttons




                3. SYM Knob                                                                         4. RET DEPR Knob


                                                                                                    6. RCL Button
         5. Priority Function/
         Data Entry Keypad
                                                                                                    7. ENTR Button


                8. BRT Knob                                                                         9. CONT Knob
                (No function)                                                                       (No function)


                                                                                                    10. 0/M-SEL Button
         11. DED Increment/
          Decrement Rocker

                                 12. Data Control      13. DRIFT C/O &      14. TFR/FLIR Controls
                                  Switch (DCS)        WARN RESET Switch         (No function)


1.   Override Buttons. Provides quick selection and access of priority DED pages. These buttons override the
     current DED page to show the page that corresponds with the override button. When pressed a second
     time, the DED will return to the previous page.
     •       COM 1. Selects the UHF DED page.
     •       COM 2. Selects the VHF DED page.
     •       IFF. Selects the IFF DED page.
     •       LIST. Selects the List DED page. The List page displays less frequently used DED pages.
2.   Master Mode Buttons. Selects Air-to-Air Missile (AAM) or Air-to-Ground (A-G) master modes, respectively.
     Pressing the same button of the current master mode returns to Navigation (NAV) master mode.
3.   SYM Knob. Rotating this knob up/down will increase/decrease the HUD symbology brightness.
4.   Reticle Depression (RET DEPR) Control. This knob raises and lowers the depressible reticle when it is
     displayed on the HUD during MAN bombing mode. Values from 0 to 260 milliradians can be set.
5.   Priority Function/Data Entry Keypad. When the CNI DED page is displayed, pressing any of these
     buttons accesses frequently used DED pages. The keypad is also used to input or modify data on the
     currently displayed DED page, as necessary.
6.   Recall (RCL) Button. The first press of this button erases the previous digit of new data that was input,
     similar to a Backspace key on a computer keyboard. The second press of this button rejects any newly input
     data entirely and restore the original data.
7.   Enter (ENTR) Button. This button accepts and enters new data into the highlighted data field.
8.   BRT Knob. The HUD raster intensity knob is not used in the Block 50 F-16.
9.   CONT Knob. The HUD raster contrast knob is not used in the Block 50 F-16.
10. Mode Select (M-SEL) Button. Cycles through available modes or settings on various DED pages. The
    button is also used to input a zero or a negative value on the currently displayed DED page, as necessary.
    It’s specific functionality for each DED page is described in the respective DED page sections.
11. DED Increment/Decrement Rocker. This switch increases or decreases values for the field selected on
    the current DED page. Values that can be increased or decreased are identified by an up and down arrow
    next to them on the DED page. The DCS is used to cycle between available fields.
12. Data Control Switch (DCS). Also known as the “Dobber” switch; moves the asterisks or the
    increment/decrement symbol on the DED, sequences through different data fields, and returns the DED to
    the CNI page. It’s specific functionality for each DED page is described in the respective DED page sections.
13. DRIFT C/O & WARN RESET Switch. Cages/releases HUD symbology to indicate the aircraft’s true flight
    path and removes messages from the center of the HUD.
     •    DRIFT C/O. Setting the switch to this position will horizontally cage the Flight Path Marker to the
          center of the HUD and the Attitude Bars to the Boresight Cross. This may be used if the FPM and
          Attitude Bars drift out of view from crosswinds or sideslip, or if a failure or degradation has occurred
          in the INS and it is operating in Attitude mode.
     •    NORM. Spring-loaded to this position from WARN RESET. Allows the FPM and Attitude Bars to drift
          left or right with the aircraft’s true flight path.
     •    WARN RESET. Resets warnings presented on the HUD and their associated voice messages. Resets
          the HUD Maximum G indicator to 1.0.
14. TFR/FLIR Controls. The TFR WX button, FLIR Increment/Decrement rocker, and FLIR GAIN/LVL/AUTO
    switch are not used in the Block 50 F-16.
Data Entry Display (DED)
The Data Entry Display is an LED-display that allows the pilot to access a variety of mission and system settings
and, if necessary, edit or modify mission data or system settings directly from the cockpit.
The CNI DED page may be considered the “home” page, in that the CNI page is commonly displayed during a
mission when the DED is not in active use. In addition, the ICP Priority Function buttons can only be accessed
when the CNI is displayed on the DED. Any time the Data Control Switch (DCS), also called the “Dobber” switch,
is moved to the RTN position, the DED will return to the CNI page. When returning to the CNI page, any data
that was entered but not accepted on the previous DED page will be erased.
Any time the UHF, VHF, IFF or LIST pages are called up using their respective Override buttons along the top of
the ICP, pressing the button a second time will return the DED to the previous state.
Each of the DED page labels in the figure below and on the following page may be left-clicked to immediately
move to the corresponding manual section describing the function of that page.




       COM 1 UHF                    COM 2 VHF                      IFF IFF                    LIST LIST




         RTN CNI




                       1 T-ILS                      2 ALOW




                       4 STPT                       5 CRUS                       6 TIME




                       7 MARK                       8 FIX                        9 A-CAL

                                   Data Entry Display – Priority Functions
Less frequently used DED pages can be accessed by pressing the LIST Override button, and then use the ICP
keypad to select the corresponding page displayed on the DED page. An additional list of miscellaneous DED
pages can be accessed through the LIST page by pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad.




                                                LIST LIST




        1 DEST                     2 BNGO                     3 VIP                      R INTG




        4 NAV                      5 MAN                      6 INS                      E DLNK




        7 CMDS                     8 MODE                     9 VRP                     0 MISC




        1 CORR                     2 MAGV                     3 OFP                      R HMCS




        4 INSM                     5 LASR                     6 GPS                     E HTS




        7 DRNG                     8 BULL                                               0 HARM

                    Data Entry Display – Secondary and Miscellaneous Functions
CNI DED Page
The Communications/Navigation/IFF DED page displays the currently tuned radio frequencies/channels for the
UHF and VHF radios, the steerpoint selected for navigation, TACAN data, wind data, system time, and IFF status.
The CNI page is the default DED page displayed at power-up and can be accessed at any time by momentarily
moving the Data Control Switch (DCS), also called the “Dobber” switch, to the RTN (Return) position.
                                                   8. Increment/Decrement Symbol

        1. Active UHF Channel/Frequency                                                                            9. Selected Steerpoint

                    2. UHF Radio Status                                                                            10. Wind Direction/Speed

       3. Active VHF Channel/Frequency                                                                             11. System Time

                     4. VHF Radio Status                                                                           12. Hack Time

      5. Enabled IFF/Transponder Modes                                                                             13. TACAN Channel/Band

                                   6. Mode 3 Transponder Code                                      7. IFF Status

                                                     *Cycle to next steerpoint                 Move Increment/Decrement
     Access Priority Function DED pages            **Cycle to next radio channel             Symbol to the previous data field




                                                                                                                             Toggle display of
                                                                                     No function                           Wind Direction/Speed




                            Operate                *Cycle to previous steerpoint               Move Increment/Decrement
                                                 **Cycle to previous radio channel             Symbol to the next data field


* Cycles to the next/previous steerpoint when the Increment/Decrement Symbol is adjacant to the Selected
Steerpoint data field.
** Cycles to next/previous UHF or VHF preset channel when the Increment/Decrement Symbol is adjacent to
the UHF or VHF data field respectively, and the corresponding radio is already tuned to a preset channel.
1.     Active UHF Channel/Frequency. Displays the preset radio channel or the manual radio frequency to
       which the ARC-164 UHF radio is currently tuned.
2.     UHF Radio Status. Displays the operating mode of the ARC-164 UHF radio.
       •      (Nothing Displayed). Radio is powered on and controlled via the Upfront Controls (UFC).
       •      GRD. Radio is powered on and tuned to the UHF GUARD frequency 243.0.
       •      BUP. Radio is powered on and controlled via the UHF Backup control panel.
       •      OFF. Radio is powered off.
3.     Active VHF Channel/Frequency. Displays the preset radio channel or the manual radio frequency to
       which the ARC-222 VHF radio is currently tuned.
4.     VHF Radio Status. Displays the operating mode of the ARC-222 VHF radio.
       •      (Nothing Displayed). Radio is powered on and controlled via the Upfront Controls (UFC).
       •      GRD. Radio is powered on and tuned to the VHF GUARD frequency 121.5.
       •      BUP. Radio is powered on but cannot be controlled in BACK UP mode.
       •      OFF. Radio is powered off.
5.   Enabled IFF/Transponder Modes. (N/I)
6.   Mode 3 Transponder Code. (N/I)
7.   IFF Status. Displays the operating mode of the APX-113 Advanced IFF system.
     •    (Nothing Displayed). IFF is controlled via the Upfront Controls (UFC) via the IFF DED page.
     •    BUP. IFF is controlled via the IFF control panel.
8.   Increment/Decrement Symbol. Indicates which data field the Increment/Decrement rocker will modify.
9.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the currently selected navigational steerpoint.
10. Wind Direction/Speed. Displays the current magnetic wind direction and speed as calculated by the
    CADC. When the winds cannot be determined by the CADC, DFLT will be displayed to the left of the wind
    direction, indicating default values are currently displayed in the data field.
11. System Time. Displays the internal system time in a 24-hour time format based on Zulu time (UTC). System
    time is automatically entered into the avionics system based on GPS data. No manual entering of time is
    required.
12. Hack Time. Displays the current Hack time as set on the TIME DED page.
13. TACAN Channel/Band. Displays information regarding the TACAN receiver.
     •              TACAN is powered and set to REC or T/R mode. Tuned channel and band (X/Y) are displayed.
     •              TACAN is powered and set to A/A T/R mode. Distance measurement to the paired TACAN
                    station is displayed between 00.1 and 99.9 NM.
     •              TACAN is powered and set to A/A T/R mode. No distance measurement available.
     (See Tactical Air Navigation for more information.)


UHF & VHF DED Pages
The UHF and VHF DED pages are accessed by pressing the COM 1 or COM 2 override buttons (respectively) on
the ICP, regardless of the currently displayed DED page. Pressing the same button a second time will return the
DED to the previous page. (See Radio Communications for more information.)
IFF DED Page
The Identification-Friend-or-Foe DED page is accessed by pressing the IFF override button on the ICP, regardless
of the currently displayed DED page. Pressing the IFF button a second time will return the DED to the previous
page.




This page is not implemented.


LIST DED Page
The List DED page is accessed by pressing the LIST override button on the ICP, regardless of the currently
displayed DED page. Pressing the LIST button a second time will return the DED to the previous page. The LIST
page displays a list of secondary DED pages that may be accessed. The ICP keypad is used to select a page from
the list.




An additional list of miscellaneous DED pages may be accessed by pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad
while the LIST page is displayed.
Priority Function DED Pages
When the CNI DED page is displayed, the buttons on the ICP keypad access eight frequently used DED pages.
Each button is labeled with the corresponding DED page that will be accessed when the button is pressed.




         RTN CNI




                      1 T-ILS                      2 ALOW




                      4 STPT                       5 CRUS                      6 TIME




                      7 MARK                       8 FIX                       9 A-CAL

                                 Data Entry Display – Priority Functions

The following Priority Function DED pages are described in the applicable sections.
     •    T-ILS – Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) & Instrument Landing System (ILS)
     •    FIX – Navigation Updates
     •    A-CAL – Navigation Updates
The remaining Priority Function DED pages are described on the pages that follow.
ALOW DED Page
The Altitude Low DED page is accessed by pressing the 2/ALOW button on the ICP keypad when the CNI DED
page is displayed. Two low altitude warnings may be set; one that is triggered by the Combined Altitude Radar
Altimeter (CARA) and the other that is triggered by the barometric altimeter.

                                                                                              3. Selected Steerpoint

             1. CARA ALOW
                                                                                              4. DED Asterisks

              2. MSL FLOOR




                                                                                         Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                            Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                 Reject
                                                                           Return DED
                                 Accept                                                                            No function
                                                                           to CNI page




                       Operate              Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                         to the next data field


1.   CARA ALOW. Displays the altitude above ground level (AGL)
     at which the Combined Altitude Radar Altimeter will trigger a                 Altitude Low Setting
     low altitude warning. May be modified by placing the DED
     asterisks over the data field, entering an altitude (in feet)
     using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
     When the radar altimeter indicates the aircraft is below this
     altitude, the Altitude Low Setting will flash in the HUD and an
     accompanying “ALTITUDE…ALTITUDE” voice message will be
     heard.
     Note that this setting is based on the altitude above ground
     level (AGL) and requires the radar altimeter to be powered on
     and transmitting for this warning to function. If the landing
     gear is down, the voice message is inhibited.
2.   MSL FLOOR. Displays the altitude above mean sea level (MSL) at which the altimeter will trigger a low
     altitude warning. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, entering an altitude (in
     feet) using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
     When the barometric altimeter indicates the aircraft is below this altitude, an “ALTITUDE…ALTITUDE” voice
     message will be heard.
3.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
4.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
CRUS TOS DED Page
The Cruise Time-Over-Steerpoint DED page is accessed by pressing the 5/CRUS button on the ICP keypad when
the CNI DED page is displayed, followed by momentarily pressing the DCS switch to the SEQ position as
necessary. This page displays the desired Time-Over-Steerpoint (TOS) of the selected steerpoint, the estimated
time of arrival (ETA), and the ground speed that is required to arrive over the steerpoint at the desired TOS.
If any CRUS mode (TOS, RNG, HOME, or EDR) is enabled when the 5/CRUS button is pressed to access the
CRUS DED pages, the DED will default to the corresponding DED page of the enabled CRUS mode.
                                             1. TOS Mode Select


                      2. System Time                                                                            6. Selected Steerpoint

      3. Desired Time-Over-Steerpoint                                                                           7. DED Asterisks

         4. Estimated Time-of-Arrival

           5. Required Ground Speed



                                                                                                  Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                                     Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                    Reject
                                                                                    Return DED                               Cycle DED to
                                    Accept                                          to CNI page                             CRUS RNG page

                                Enable

                          Operate                    Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                  to the next data field


1.   TOS Mode Select. Enables/disables CRUS TOS mode by placing the DED asterisks around the data field
     and pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad, which will highlight the text within the data field when
     CRUS TOS mode is enabled. See the example on the following page for more information.
     Only one CRUS mode may be enabled at any given time. Enabling CRUS TOS mode will disable any other
     CRUS mode that is already enabled.
2.   System Time. Displays the aircraft system time in a 24-hour time format.
3.   Desired Time-Over-Steerpoint. Displays the desired time to arrive over the selected steerpoint, in a 24-
     hour time format. This can be used to synchronize tactical actions with other forces within the battlespace.
4.   Estimated Time-of-Arrival. Displays the estimated time that the aircraft will arrive over the selected
     steerpoint at the current ground speed if flown directly toward the steerpoint, in a 24-hour time format.
5.   Required Ground Speed. Displays the ground speed that is required in order to arrive over the selected
     steerpoint at the desired TOS, if flown directly toward the steerpoint.
6.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
7.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
When CRUS TOS mode is enabled, a speed caret will be displayed along the HUD Velocity Scale (if shown) that
corresponds with the speed required to arrive at the selected steerpoint’s desired TOS, if flown directly toward
the steerpoint. The HUD Time To Go data field will be replaced with the Estimated Time-of-Arrival (ETA) to that
steerpoint at the current ground speed.
If the landing gear is down, the caret is removed from the HUD.




                                     Speed Caret




                               Estimated Time-of-Arrival
                                                                                           TOS Mode Select




In the example above, the Desired Time-Over-Steerpoint (DES TOS) for steerpoint 3 is 10:15:00, but the
Estimated Time of Arrival (ETA) at the current ground speed is 10:14:37, which is 23 seconds early. The speed
caret indicates that the pilot should reduce the ground speed so that the ETA is increased to match the DES TOS.
CRUS RNG DED Page
The Cruise Range DED page is accessed by pressing the 5/CRUS button on the ICP keypad when the CNI DED
page is displayed, followed by momentarily pressing the DCS switch to the SEQ position as necessary. This page
displays an estimate of the remaining fuel onboard when the aircraft arrives at the selected steerpoint.
If any CRUS mode (TOS, RNG, HOME, or EDR) is enabled when the 5/CRUS button is pressed to access the
CRUS DED pages, the DED will default to the corresponding DED page of the enabled CRUS mode.
                                          1. RNG Mode Select


                 2. Selected Steerpoint

                                                                                                          5. DED Asterisks
        3. Fuel Remaining at Steerpoint


             4. Wind Direction & Speed




                                                 Cycle to next steerpoint                   No function




                                                                              Return DED                           Cycle DED to
                                                                              to CNI page                        CRUS HOME page

                               Enable

                         Operate               Cycle to previous steerpoint                 No function



1.   RNG Mode Select. Enables/disables CRUS RNG mode by placing the DED asterisks around the data field
     and pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad, which will highlight the text within the data field when
     CRUS RNG mode is enabled. See the example on the following page for more information.
     Only one CRUS mode may be enabled at any given time. Enabling CRUS RNG mode will disable any other
     CRUS mode that is already enabled.
2.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
3.   Fuel at Steerpoint. Displays an estimate of the remaining fuel onboard when the aircraft arrives at the
     selected steerpoint based on the current ground speed, range to the selected steerpoint, current fuel
     consumption, and wind data. If the landing gear is down, this data field will remain at the last calculated
     value.
4.   Wind Direction/Speed. Displays the current wind direction (in degrees magnetic) and wind speed as
     calculated by the CADC. If the landing gear is down, this data field will remain at the last calculated value.
5.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
When CRUS RNG mode is enabled, a speed caret is displayed along the HUD Velocity Scale (if shown) that
corresponds with the speed that will result in the maximum flight range based on the current altitude and wind
data.
If the landing gear is down, the caret is removed from the HUD.




                                   Speed Caret




                                                                                         RNG Mode Select
CRUS HOME DED Page
The Cruise Home DED page is accessed by pressing the 5/CRUS button on the ICP keypad when the CNI DED
page is displayed, followed by momentarily pressing the DCS switch to the SEQ position as necessary. This page
displays the estimated remaining fuel onboard when the aircraft arrives at the home steerpoint and the optimum
cruising altitude.
If any CRUS mode (TOS, RNG, HOME, or EDR) is enabled when the 5/CRUS button is pressed to access the
CRUS DED pages, the DED will default to the corresponding DED page of the enabled CRUS mode.
                                        1. HOME Mode Select


                      2. Home Point

               3. Fuel at Home Point                                                           6. DED Asterisks

          4. Optimum Cruise Altitude

             5. Wind Direction/Speed



                                                   Cycle home point to
                                                     next steerpoint                   No function




                                                                         Return DED                       Cycle DED to
                                                                         to CNI page                     CRUS EDR page

                               Enable

                          Operate                  Cycle home point to                 No function
                                                   previous steerpoint


1.   HOME Mode Select. Enables/disables CRUS HOME mode by placing the DED asterisks around the data
     field and pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad, which will highlight the text within the data field
     when CRUS HOME mode is enabled. See the example on the following page for more information.
     Only one CRUS mode may be enabled at any given time. Enabling CRUS HOME mode will disable any other
     CRUS mode that is already enabled.
2.   Home Point. Displays the steerpoint to which flight profile calculations are being performed. The ICP
     Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks may be
     placed over the data field and a steerpoint number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
3.   Fuel at Home point. Displays an estimate of the remaining fuel onboard when the aircraft arrives at the
     steerpoint that is set as the Home point, if flown directly toward the steerpoint at optimum speed and
     altitude. This value is also displayed on the HUD below the Master Mode, in hundreds of pounds. If the
     landing gear is down, this data field will remain at the last calculated value.
4.   Optimum Cruise Altitude. Displays the altitude that will result in the most fuel efficient flight profile based
     on the current gross weight and corresponding angle-of-attack required to maintain level flight. As fuel is
     burned and weight decreases, this altitude will also increase due to the increased fuel efficiency for lower
     angles-of-attack. If the landing gear is down, this data field will remain at the last calculated value.
5.   Wind Direction/Speed. Displays the current wind direction (in degrees magnetic) and wind speed as
     calculated by the CADC. If the landing gear is down, this data field will remain at the last calculated value.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
When CRUS HOME mode is enabled, the steerpoint set as the Home point becomes the selected steerpoint, and
speed and altitude carets are displayed along the HUD Velocity Scale and Altitude Scales (if shown) that
correspond with the speed and altitude profile that will return to the Home steerpoint using the minimum amount
of fuel. The profile includes a minimum fuel climb at military power or a descent at idle power to the optimum
altitude, a gradual cruise climb in which the altitude increases as fuel is burned, and a final descent at idle power
to a point 5,000 feet over the Home steerpoint.
If the landing gear is down, the carets are removed from the HUD.




                              Speed Caret     Altitude Caret




                                                                                              HOME Mode Select
                                   Fuel at Home Point




In the example above, the estimated remaining fuel onboard when the aircraft arrives over the Home point,
steerpoint 11, is 6124 lbs. (pounds), based on the assumption the pilot adheres to the speed/altitude profile that
is displayed in the HUD along the Velocity Scale and Altitude Scale. The fuel displayed in the lower left corner of
the HUD is rounded to the nearest hundred pounds of fuel, indicating 06100 lbs.
CRUS EDR DED Page
The Cruise Endurance DED page is accessed by pressing the 5/CRUS button on the ICP keypad when the CNI
DED page is displayed, followed by momentarily pressing the DCS switch to the SEQ position as necessary. This
page displays the estimated time until the onboard fuel reaches the Bingo value set on the BNGO DED page and
the optimum Mach number to maximize flight endurance.
If any CRUS mode (TOS, RNG, HOME, or EDR) is enabled when the 5/CRUS button is pressed to access the
CRUS DED pages, the DED will default to the corresponding DED page of the enabled CRUS mode.
                                         1. EDR Mode Select


               2. Selected Steerpoint

                    3. Time to Bingo                                                                  6. DED Asterisks

                   4. Optimum Mach

           5. Wind Direction & Speed



                                                   Cycle to next steerpoint                   No function




                                                                                Return DED                       Cycle DED to
                                                                                to CNI page                     CRUS TOS page

                                Enable

                          Operate                Cycle to previous steerpoint                 No function



1.   EDR Mode. Enables/disables CRUS EDR mode by placing the DED asterisks around the data field and
     pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad, which will highlight the text within the data field when
     CRUS EDR mode is enabled. See the example on the following page for more information.
     Only one CRUS mode may be enabled at any given time. Enabling CRUS EDR mode will disable any other
     CRUS mode that is already enabled.
2.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
3.   Time to Bingo. Displays the estimated time remaining until the onboard fuel reaches the Bingo fuel entered
     on the BNGO DED page, based on the current rate of fuel consumption. If the landing gear is down, this
     data field will remain at the last calculated value.
4.   Optimum Mach. Displays the Mach number that will result in the maximum endurance based on the current
     altitude. If the landing gear is down, this data field will remain at the last calculated value.
5.   Wind Direction/Speed. Displays the current magnetic wind direction and speed as calculated by the
     CADC. If the landing gear is down, this data field will remain at the last calculated value.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
When CRUS EDR mode is enabled, a speed caret is displayed along the HUD Velocity Scale (if shown) that
corresponds with the Mach number that will result in the maximum endurance, or flight duration, based on the
current altitude.
If the landing gear is down, the caret is removed from the HUD.




                                    Speed Caret




                                                                                           EDR Mode Select




In the example above, the onboard fuel quantity will be depleted to the Bingo value in approximately 58 minutes,
based on the current rate of fuel consumption. The speed caret indicates that the pilot should reduce the Mach
number to 0.57 to minimize the rate of fuel consumption, based on the current altitude, to maximize the remaining
flight endurance.
TIME DED Page
The Time DED page is accessed by pressing the 6/TIME button on the ICP keypad when the CNI page is
displayed on the DED. This page displays the aircraft system time and date; and allows the pilot to set an
additional time reference and adjust the Time-Over-Steerpoint (TOS) for all steerpoints simultaneously.


                       1. System Time

                         2. Hack Time
                                                                                                   5. DED Asterisks
         3. Delta Time-Over-Steerpoint

                              4. Date



                                                  Start/Stop                       Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                            Hack Time progression                 the previous data field


                                   Reject
                                                                     Return DED
                                   Accept                                                                    No function
                                                                     to CNI page




                         Operate             Reset Hack time and                    Move DED asterisks
                                            remove from CNI page                   to the next data field


1.   System Time. Displays the internal system time in a 24-hour time format based on Zulu time (UTC). May
     be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a time in HHMMSS format using the
     ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
     When GPS data is available, time is automatically entered and “GPS SYSTEM” will be displayed. Manual time
     may be entered if necessary, and “SYSTEM” will be displayed; but is not required unless GPS data is not
     available.
2.   Hack Time. Displays an additional time reference independent of System Time. This can be used as a
     separate time reference for the local time zone, or as a stopwatch for low-level navigation or vulnerability
     periods.
3.   Delta Time-Over-Steerpoint. Updates the Time-Over-Steerpoint (TOS) values across all steerpoints using
     a single delta value. When a Delta TOS is applied, it will automatically increase or decrease all valid TOS
     entries for each steerpoint. This may be used if coordinated strikes or tactical actions must be adjusted
     dynamically mid-mission, in which the entire mission timeline may be moved earlier or later as needed.
     As an example, if the required time adjustment is 5 minutes, a Delta TOS would be entered as -00:05:00 or
     00:05:00, depending on whether the 5 minute adjustment was to an earlier time or a later time, respectively.
     Valid Delta TOS entries range from -23:59:59 to 23:59:59 in HHMMSS format. To enter a negative value (to
     adjust all TOS to an earlier time), press 0/M-SEL to enter a negative symbol, followed by the delta itself.
     NOTE: Delta TOS adjustments are cumulative while the TIME DED page is displayed. However, if the DED
     is set to a different page, the DELTA TOS data field itself will be zeroed even though the TOS adjustments
     to all steerpoints will remain applied.
4.   System Date. Displays the internal system date. System date is automatically entered into the avionics
     system based on GPS data. No manual entering of the date is required.
5.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
LIST DED Pages
The LIST page displays a list of secondary DED pages that may be accessed by pressing the corresponding
buttons on the ICP keypad. An additional list of miscellaneous DED pages may be accessed by pressing the 0/M-
SEL button on the ICP keypad while the LIST page is displayed.




                                                   LIST LIST




         1 DEST                       2 BNGO                     3 VIP                     R INTG




         4 NAV                        5 MAN                      6 INS                     E DLNK




         7 CMDS                       8 MODE                     9 VRP                     0 MISC

                                 Data Entry Display – Secondary Functions

The following LIST DED pages are described in the applicable sections.
     •    DEST – Editing a Steerpoint
     •    VIP – Visual Reference Point & Visual Initial Point
     •    NAV – Navigation Solutions
     •    INS – INS Alignment
     •    DLNK – TNDL Datalink
     •    CMDS – Defensive Systems
     •    VRP – Visual Reference Point & Visual Initial Point
The following LIST DED pages are not implemented: INTG
The remaining LIST DED pages are described on the pages that follow.
BNGO DED Page
The Bingo DED page is accessed by pressing 2/ALOW on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is displayed.
The value set on this page will notify the pilot when the onboard fuel level reaches the corresponding quantity.




                                                                                           3. Selected Steerpoint
             1. Bingo Setting


                2. Total Fuel                                                              4. DED Asterisks




           Modify                              Cycle to next steerpoint                   No function


                                    Reject
                                                                            Return DED
                                    Accept                                                                    No function
                                                                            to CNI page




                          Operate            Cycle to previous steerpoint                 No function



1.   Bingo Setting. Displays the Bingo fuel setting, in pounds. May be modified using the ICP keypad by
     inputting a fuel value and pressing ENTR.
2.   Total Fuel. Displays the total onboard fuel, to include external fuel tanks, in pounds.
3.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
4.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
When the onboard fuel quantity decreases below
the Bingo setting, a FUEL advisory will be displayed
in the lower left corner of the HUD, accompanied
by a “BINGO…BINGO” voice message. A FUEL
warning message will also flash in the center of the           Flashing FUEL Warning
HUD, which may be acknowledged by momentarily
setting the Drift Cut-Out/Warning Reset switch on
the ICP to the WARN RESET position.
NOTE: The FUEL warning and associated voice
message are triggered any time the combined
fuselage fuel tanks or total fuel quantities fall
below the Bingo setting. If the Bingo quantity is
set to any amount over ~6070 pounds when the
Fuel Quantity Select knob on the FUEL QTY SEL
panel is in the NORM position, or if the Bingo                                                                      DED Data
quantity is set to any amount over 6667 pounds
when the Fuel Quantity Select Knob is in any
position other than NORM, the Bingo fuel warning               FUEL Advisory
and voice message will be triggered.
MAN DED Page
The Manual DED page is accessed by pressing 5/CRUS on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is displayed.
This page is used to adjust the wingspan settings of the EEGS sub-mode or ballistics data for air-to-ground
weapons that lack an integrated SMS profile within the F-16C avionics.



               1. Wingspan                                                                     4. Selected Steerpoint

                    2. Range
                                                                                               5. DED Asterisks
             3. Time-Of-Fall



                                                                                         Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                            Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                   Reject
                                                                           Return DED
                                   Accept                                                                          No function
                                                                           to CNI page




                         Operate            Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                         to the next data field


1.   Wingspan. Displays the manual target wingspan in use by the EEGS sub-mode. This value adjusts the
     width of the EEGS Funnel to account for aircraft of different wingspans. When the target wings are perfectly
     bracketed within the EEGS Funnel, an optimal air-to-air gun solution has been obtained. May be modified
     using the ICP keypad by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a wingspan value (in feet),
     and pressing ENTR.
     This is particularly important when engaging a hostile aircraft when using the Enhanced Envelope Gun Sight
     (EEGS) in Level II, in which case a passive ranging solution is necessary due to lack of an FCR-derived
     weapon solution. (See Air-to-Air Gunnery for more information.)
2.   Range. Displays the horizontal distance a free-fall weapon is expected to travel under specific conditions.
     (N/I)
3.   Time-Of-Fall. Displays the time that is expect to elapse between the time of weapon release and the
     surface impact under specific conditons. (N/I)
4.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
5.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
MODE DED Page
The Mode DED page is accessed by pressing 8/FIX on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is displayed.
This page is used as a backup method to change the master mode between NAV, A-A, or A-G, in case there is a
failure of the physical Master Mode buttons on the ICP itself.



                1. Mode Select                                                        2. DED Asterisks




          Operate                                No function                     No function




                                                                  Return DED                         Toggle between
                                                                  to CNI page                       A-A and A-G mode

                                 Enable

                        Operate                  No function                      No function



1.   Mode Select. Displays the master mode (“A-A” or “A-G”) that will be entered if the 0/M-SEL button is
     pressed. Momentarily setting the DCS (“Dobber switch”) to the SEQ position or pressing any button on the
     ICP keypad will toggle the DED page between A-A and A-G modes. If the current master mode matches the
     mode displayed on the DED Mode page, the text between the DED Asterisks will be highlighted. Pressing
     the 0/M-SEL button when the DED Mode Select data field is highlighted will set the master mode to NAV.
     NOTE: This page is not functional if the Dogfight switch on the throttle is set to the outboard (Dogfight) or
     inboard (Missile Override) positions.
2.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
MISC DED Pages
The Miscellaneous DED page extends the LIST page by displaying additional DED pages that may be accessed
by pressing the corresponding buttons on the ICP keypad.




                                                 LIST LIST                             0 MISC




        1 CORR                      2 MAGV                      3 OFP                  R HMCS




        4 INSM                      5 LASR                      6 GPS                  E HTS




        7 DRNG                      8 BULL                                             0 HARM

                             Data Entry Display – Miscellaneous Functions

The following MISC DED pages are described in the applicable sections.
    •    MAGV – INS Alignment
    •    HMCS – Joint Helmet-Mounted Cueing System
    •    LASR – Litening II Targeting Pod
    •    HTS – HARM Targeting System
    •    BULL – “Bullseye” Reference Point
    •    HARM – AGM-88 HARM
The following MISC DED pages are not implemented: CORR, OFP, INSM, GPS, DRNG.
MULTI-FUNCTION DISPLAYS (MFD)
Two color Multi-Function Displays (MFD) provide video and text presentations to the pilot for the aircraft’s various
sensors. The MFDs also serve as the primary interface to the aircraft’s external stores, data transfer and loading
equipment, and diagnostics for the aircraft systems and flight controls.
Each sensor or aircraft system can be accessed via their respective MFD “format”. Some MFD formats will include
multiple “pages” that can be selected to access additional options or settings. The options and settings associated
with the systems of each format or page are controlled through Option Select Buttons (OSBs) around the display
bezel of each MFD. Each OSB interacts with the text displayed next to it to toggle through functions or select a
different page.
Additionally, four rocker buttons are present on each MFD that allows the pilot to adjust the appearance of the
video and text on the MFD screen itself.
                                                     1. OSB 1→5



          2. GAIN Rocker                                                                     3. SYM Rocker




           1. OSB 16 ↑ 20                                                                     1. OSB 6 ↓ 10




                                                                                             5. CON Rocker
           4. BRT Rocker



                                                    1. OSB 15←11


1.   Option Select Button (OSB). Selects the option corresponding with the displayed text adjacent to the
     MFD button itself.
     •    OSB 1-5. The top row of Option Select Buttons are numbered from 1 starting on the far left to 5 on
          the far right.
     •    OSB 6-10. The right column of Option Select Buttons are numbered from 6 starting at the top to 10
          at the bottom.
     •    OSB 11-15. The bottom row of Option Select Buttons are numbered from 11 starting on the far right
          to 15 on the far left.
     •    OSB 16-20. The left column of Option Select Buttons are numbered from 16 starting at the bottom to
          20 at the top.
2.   GAIN Rocker. Adjusts the brightness of the FCR video when in GM, GMT, SEA or BCN operating modes.
     The video is adjusted independently of the symbology intensity or overall brightness/contrast settings of the
     MFD itself. If held continuously to either position, the video will continuously increment to the minimum or
     maximum allowable brightness settings.
3.   SYM Rocker. Adjusts the intensity of the MFD symbology independently of the FCR video or overall
     brightness/contrast settings of the MFD itself. If held continuously to either position, the symbology intensity
     will continuously increment to the minimum or maximum allowable settings.
4.   BRT Rocker. Adjusts the overall brightness setting of the MFD display. If held continuously to either
     position, the brightness setting will continuously increment to the minimum or maximum allowable settings.
5.   CON Rocker. Adjusts the overall contrast setting of the MFD display. If held continuously to either position,
     the contrast setting will continuously increment to the minimum or maximum allowable settings.


Format Selection Master Menu Page
The Format Selection Master Menu page is used to assign a specific MFD format to the Format Select buttons
(OSB 13, OSB 14, and OSB 15). Additionally, the RESET MENU page is accessed from Master Menu page, which
can be used to reset the MFD symbology, brightness and contrast settings to their default values.
                          1. BLANK Format   2. HAD Format     3. RCCE Format    4. RESET MENU Page




          5. FCR Format                                                                              10. SMS Format



         6. TGP Format                                                                               11. HSD Format



         7. WPN Format                                                                               12. DTE Format



          8. TFR Format                                                                              13. TEST Format



         9. FLIR Format                                                                              14. FLCS Format




                              15. Swap Button   16. Format Select Buttons   17. Declutter Button


1.   BLANK Format. Assigns the BLANK MFD format to the highlighted Format Select button. When a Format
     Select button is assigned to the BLANK format, no text will be displayed above the OSB. The format selection
     corresponding with that OSB will be removed from the MFD format selection cycle when the DMS Left and
     DMS Right commands are used on the Side Stick Controller (SSC).
2.   HARM Attack Display (HAD) Format. Assigns the HAD MFD format to the highlighted Format Select
     button. The HAD format is used to operate the externally mounted HARM Targeting System pod. The HTS
     pod is used for detection, classification, and geo-location of ground-based and maritime threat radar
     systems. The HTS pod is most commonly used during the Suppressbion of Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD)
     mission and can hand-off specific threat radar emitters to AGM-88 HARM anti-radar missiles for engagement.
     However, the HTS pod can also be used to generate targeting data for engagement by other weapons,
     aircraft, or other allied forces. (See HARM Targeting System for more information.)
3.   RCCE Format. The Reconnaissance MFD format is not functional in the F-16C variant that is simulated by
     DCS: F-16C Viper.
4.   RESET MENU Format. Displays the Reset Menu page. This page includes options to reset the MFD to the
     default or pre-programmed values for symbology intensity, brightness and contrast. (N/I)
5.   Fire Control Radar (FCR) Format. Assigns the MFD FCR format to the highlighted Format Select button.
     The FCR format is used to operate the APG-68 radar system. The APG-68 is used in air-to-air mode for
     detection, tracking and engagement of hostile aircraft; and in air-to-ground mode for ground mapping,
     ranging, and detection and targeting of ground vehicles or maritime vessels. (See APG-68 Fire Control Radar
     for more information.)
6.   Targeting Pod (TGP) Format. Assigns the MFD TGP format to the highlighted Format Select button. The
     TGP format is used to operate externally mounted electro-optical sensor pods such as the Litening II.
     Targeting pods are used for medium to high altitude reconnaissance; optical detection and tracking of
     ground targets; or for designation of ground targets for engagement by precision guided munitions (PGM).
     (See Litening II Target Pod for more information.)
7.   Weapon (WPN) Format. Assigns the MFD WPN format to the highlighted Format Select button. The WPN
     format is used to relay sensor video and targeting data from munitions such as the AGM-65 TV/IR guided
     missiles or the AGM-88 HARM anti-radar missile so the pilot can directly control the respective missile’s
     targeting systems prior to weapons release. (See AGM-65 Maverick and AGM-88 HARM for more
     information.)
8.   TFR Format. The Terrain Following Radar MFD format is not functional in the F-16C variant that is simulated
     by DCS: F-16C Viper.
9.   FLIR Format. The Forward Looking Infrared MFD format is not functional in the F-16C variant that is
     simulated by DCS: F-16C Viper.
10. Stores Management System (SMS) Format. Assigns the SMS MFD format to the highlighted Format
    Select button. The SMS format is used to select different munitions for employment, select and modify
    weapon release profiles, set warhead fuzing, and adjust terminal attack parameters. (See the Tactical
    Employment chapter for more information.)
11. Horizontal Situation Display (HSD) Format. Assigns the HSD MFD format to the highlighted Format
    Select button. The HSD format provides the pilot with a top-down view of the battlespace around the aircraft
    to include navigational data, airspace and tactical boundaries, air defense threats, and fuses onboard radar
    data with tactical information derived from allied aircraft (such as other flight members and AWACS). (See
    the Tactical Employment chapter for more information.)
12. Data Transfer Equipment (DTE) Format. Assigns the MFD DTE format to the highlighted Format Select
    button. The DTE format is used to load mission planning data from the DTU into the MMC. (N/I)
13. Test (TEST) Format. Assigns the TEST MFD format to the highlighted Format Select button. The TEST
    format is used to display the Maintenance Fault List (MFL) and perform Built-In Tests (BIT) during system
    diagnostics and maintenance procedures. (N/I)
14. Flight Control System (FLCS) Format. Assigns the FLCS MFD format to the highlighted Format Select
    button. The FLCS format is used to display data from of Flight Control Computer (FLCC). (N/I)
15. Swap Button. Pressing this button will swap the currently displayed MFD formats between the left and
    right MFDs. In addition, the MFD formats assigned to each Format Select Button will be swapped as well.
16. Format Select Buttons. Selects the corresponding MFD format for display on the MFD. When the Format
    Selection Master Menu page is displayed, selecting the OSB will highlight the text above it and enable a new
    format to be assigned to that button. If the text displayed above the OSB is already highlighted, pressing
    the same OSB will leave the Format Selection Master Menu page and display the MFD format that is assigned
    to that button.
17. Declutter Button. Removes the text symbology adjacent to each corresponding OSB on the MFD.
    However, the associated commands for each OSB will still remain. (N/I)


Re-assigning MFD Formats
Each of the seven avionics master modes (Navigation, Air-to-Air, Air-to-Ground, Missile Override, Dogfight,
Selective Jettison, and Emergency Jettison) are initialized with pre-configured MFD formats assigned to each
Format Select button of each MFD. These MFD format assignments can be re-configured by the pilot at any time
via the Format Selection Master Menu page.
To assign a different format to a Format Select button (OSB 12, OSB 13 or OSB 14) on either MFD, set the
avionics to the master mode that is meant to be edited.
1.   If the MFD text above the Format Select OSB that is to be re-
     assigned to a different MFD format is already highlighted,
     press that same OSB to open the Format Selection Master
     Menu page.
     If the MFD text above the Format Select OSB that is to be re-
     assigned to a different MFD format is not highlighted, press
     that same OSB to highlight the corresponding text above it,
     and then press that same OSB a second time to open the
     Format Selection Master Menu page.
                                                                                  OSB 13 is highlighted
                                                                                      and pressed
     If the Format Select OSB that is to be re-assigned to a
     different MFD format is assigned the BLANK format with no
     corresponding text above it, press that same OSB to highlight
     the empty text field above it, and then press that same OSB
     a second time to open the Format Selection Master Menu
     page.


2.   The MFD format that is already assigned to the currently
     selected Format Select OSB will be highlighted among the
     available formats displayed on the Master Menu page. Press
     the OSB next to the corresponding MFD format in the menu
     to assign that format to the currently selected Format Select
     OSB. The MFD will exit the Master Menu page and display the
     assigned format for that Format Select button.
     If the pilot does not wish to change the MFD format of the
     currently selected Format Select OSB, selecting the format                   TGP format is selected
     that is already assigned to that Format Select button or                    from Master Menu page
     selecting any of the Format Select buttons themselves along
     the bottom of the MFD will exit the Master Menu page with no
     changes made.
NOTE: In any given master mode, an MFD format can only
be assigned to one Format Select button on either MFD at a
time. The exception to this limitation is the BLANK format,
which can be assigned to multiple Format Select buttons. It is
possible that all six Format select buttons on the MFDs could
be assigned to the BLANK format for a given master mode,
despite the impracticality of it.
If an MFD format is assigned from the Master Menu page that
is already assigned to another Format Select button on either
                                                                    TGP format is
MFD, that format will be removed from the other Format           assigned to OSB 13
Select button and assigned to the currently highlighted OSB,
and the BLANK format will be assigned to the former.
AUTOPILOT
The F-16’s autopilot provides a “hands-off” flight control capability for reduced pilot workload. When the autopilot
is engaged, the Flight Control Computer (FLCC) electronically commands movement to the flight control servo-
actuators in accordance with the enabled autopilot modes based on data received from the Inertial Navigation
System (INS) and the Central Air Data Computer (CADC).




Depending on the configuration of the autopilot controls (described on the following pages), the autopilot may
be configured to perform the following tasks.
•    Maintain a heading, as set by the pilot.                    •    Maintain the current aircraft altitude.
•    Maintain a direct course to the selected steerpoint,        •    Maintain the current aircraft attitude.
     as set by the pilot or the navigation route.
It is important to note that the autopilot is only intended to reduce pilot
workload, allowing the pilot to focus on other cockpit tasks such as
reviewing kneeboard information, tuning radios, or interacting with
aircraft sensors. The autopilot is not capable of navigating a flight plan,
which includes speed and altitude changes, nor is it capable of precisely         Automatically      Manually sequenced
flying along a navigation route. The pilot must continue to monitor and         sequenced after      by the pilot prior to
                                                                                  overflying the        overflying the
adjust the autopilot settings as necessary.                                    selected steerpoint   selected steerpoint

As an example, if steerpoint sequencing has been set to AUTO on the
STPT DED page, the next steerpoint in the route is selected when the
aircraft is within 2 nautical miles of the selected steerpoint and the range
to the selected steerpoint is increasing. If the autopilot is configured to
maintain a direct course to the selected steerpoint, the autopilot will turn
toward the next steerpoint after the selected steerpoint has been
overflown. Alternatively, the pilot may manually sequence to the next            Autopilot steering with AUTO
steerpoint to initiate the turn in advance of the selected steerpoint so            steerpoint sequencing
that the aircraft rolls out of the turn along the navigation route itself.
Autopilot Controls
The autopilot is enabled and configured by the autopilot
switches, along with additional controls within the
cockpit, depending on the selected modes of operation.
1.   Autopilot Switches. The PITCH and ROLL
     switches located along the bottom of the MISC
                                                                                          4
     panel engage the autopilot and allow the pilot to
                                                                                   4
     select the desired autopilot modes.
     (See Autopilot Settings for more information.)
2.   Paddle Switch. The Paddle switch on the base of
                                                                 1
     the Side Stick Controller (SSC) is used to
     momentarily disengage the autopilot for the
     duration that the switch is depressed and held.                           3
     When released, the autopilot will attempt to
     capture new reference values of pitch, roll, and/or                                      2
     altitude, depending on the autopilot modes that
     have been selected using the PITCH and ROLL
     switches on the MISC panel.
     (See Hands-On Controls for more information.)
3.   EHSI Heading Set Knob. When the autopilot is
     engaged and the ROLL switch is set to the HDG
     SEL position, the Heading Set knob on the EHSI is
     used to select the heading reference to which the
     autopilot will turn toward and maintain.
     (See Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicator for
     more information.)
4.   Steerpoint Navigation. When the autopilot is engaged and the ROLL switch is set to the STRG SEL
     position, the Upfront Controls may be used to select the steerpoint used for navigation.
     (See Selecting a Steerpoint for more information.)
The autopilot modes selected by the corresponding PITCH and ROLL switch positions are described below.

                                                            PITCH

                                 ALT HOLD                  A/P OFF                     ATT HOLD
                            Autopilot enabled              Autopilot             Autopilot enabled
                      •    Maintains level altitude        disabled        •    Maintains pitch attitude
         HDG SEL
                      •    Maintains heading set by                        •    Maintains heading set by
                           Heading Set knob on EHSI                             Heading Set knob on EHSI
                            Autopilot enabled              Autopilot             Autopilot enabled
 ROLL   ATT HOLD •         Maintains level altitude        disabled        •    Maintains pitch attitude
                 •         Maintains roll attitude                         •    Maintains roll attitude
                            Autopilot enabled              Autopilot             Autopilot enabled
                      •    Maintains level altitude        disabled        •    Maintains pitch attitude
         STRG SEL
                      •    Maintains course to the                         •    Maintains course to the
                           selected steerpoint                                  selected steerpoint
Autopilot Settings
The PITCH and ROLL switches located along the bottom of the                        1. PITCH Switch
MISC panel engage the autopilot and allow the pilot to select the
desired autopilot modes.
1.   PITCH Switch. Enables/disables the autopilot and selects
     the autopilot mode of operation in the pitch axis.
     •    ALT HOLD. Enables the autopilot and selects Altitude
          Hold mode. The autopilot will hold the current
          barometric altitude.
     •    A/P OFF. Disables the autopilot.
     •    ATT HOLD. Enables the autopilot and selects Attitude                                  2. ROLL Switch
          Hold mode. The autopilot will hold the current pitch
          attitude.
2.   ROLL Switch. Selects the autopilot’s mode of operation within the roll axis.
     •    HDG SEL. If the PITCH switch is set to the ALT HOLD or ATT HOLD positions, the autopilot will turn
          toward and maintain the heading reference selected by the Heading Set knob on the Electronic
          Horizontal Situation Indicator (EHSI).
     •    ATT HOLD. If the PITCH switch is set to the ALT HOLD or ATT HOLD positions, the autopilot will hold
          the current roll attitude.
     •    STRG SEL. If the PITCH switch is set to the ALT HOLD or ATT HOLD positions, the autopilot will turn
          toward and maintain a direct course to the selected steerpoint.


Autopilot Engagement
If the autopilot is enabled by setting the PITCH switch to the ALT HOLD
or ATT HOLD positions, and the Paddle switch on the SSC is not
depressed, the autopilot will engage the modes of operation as
selected by the PITCH and ROLL switches. When engaged, the
autopilot will be limited to pitch command rates of +3.0 to -1.0 G, roll
rates of 20° per second, and bank angles of ±30°.
When set to the ALT HOLD or ATT HOLD positions, the PITCH switch
is held in place by an electrical solenoid. If any criteria is met that
                                                                                     PITCH switch set to         Paddle switch
results in an automatic disengagement of the autopilot, the solenoid               ALT HOLD or ATT HOLD           not pressed
holding the PITCH switch in place will release and the switch will spring
back to the A/P OFF position.




                  Pitch rate +3.0 to -1.0 G           Roll rate ≤ 20° per second             Bank angle ±30°

                                              Autopilot Command Authority

Depressing the Paddle switch on the SSC will only momentarily disengage the autopilot for the duration that the
switch is depressed and held; the PITCH switch will remain in ALT HOLD or ATT HOLD. This allows the pilot to
assign new reference values of pitch, roll, and/or altitude when the Paddle switch is released.
Autopilot Disengagement
If any of the following criteria is met, the autopilot will automatically disengage, the solenoid holding the PITCH
switch in place will release, and the switch will spring back to the A/P OFF position.
     •     Angle-of-Attack exceeds 15°.
     •     Bank angle exceeds 60°.
     •     Low speed audio warning is triggered.
     •     Landing gear is extended and locked.
     •     The autopilot has failed or malfunctioned.
     •     The FLCS is operating on Digital Backup software.
     •     ALT FLAPS switch is set to EXTEND position below 400 knots.
     •     TRIM/AP DISC switch is set to DISC position.
     •     AIR REFUEL switch is set to OPEN position.
     •     MANUAL PITCH switch is set to OVRD position.




               Angle-of-Attack > 15°                      Bank angle > 60°           Low speed Audio Warning




         Landing gear extended and locked            Autopilot Failure/Malfunction     FLCS Digital Backup




                                            Autopilot Disengagement Conditions
PROCEDURES
     PROCEDURES
AIRCRAFT START
The F-16 is designed to be started without ground support equipment and can be airborne within minutes.
Although it can be operated off external power sources during extended ground operations or maintenance
procedures, it is not necessary.




After performing a walkaround, the pilot climbs into the cockpit, secures seat restraints, oxygen supply hoses,
and communications leads. Initial electrical system checks are conducted and the pilot initiates a start of the Jet
Fuel Starter (JFS). The JFS is a small gas turbine engine that is used to spool the main engine to sufficient speed
prior to introducing fuel into the main engine combustion section. Once the engine RPM has accelerated to 20%
and the SEC light on the Caution Light panel extinguishes, the pilot advances the throttle from OFF to IDLE to
introduce fuel.
Once the engine stabilizes at idle speed and is providing primary electrical power via the main generator, the
pilot initializes the aircraft systems, performs an alignment of the inertial navigation system, and performs
remaining pre-flight checks.
If desired, the DCS: F-16C Viper may be started using an auto-start sequence by pressing [LWin]+[Home]. To
cease the auto-start sequence, press [LWin]+[End].
NOTE: When the auto-start sequence is complete, the following systems will be configured as shown.
     •    INS Knob – ALIGN NORM
               o    Must be set to NAV prior to initiating taxi.
     •    IFF MASTER Knob – STBY.
     •    ALR-56M Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) – Powered Off.
     •    CMDS MODE Knob – OFF.
     •    ECM PWR Switch – OFF.
               o    Requires a 3-minute warm-up prior to operation.
Before Engine Start
1.   MAIN PWR switch – BATT.
     NOTE: The amount of power available from the
     battery is limited so do not leave the MAIN PWR
     switch in BATT or MAIN PWR for more than 5
     minutes without starting the engine or applying
                                                                                                        7
     external power if more time is needed.
2.   Verify light on ELEC Control Panel:
     •    ACFT BATT lFLCS RLYl – On.
3.   FLCS PWR TEST switch – TEST and hold.
4.   Verify lights on ELEC Control Panel:
     •    lFLCS PMGl – On.                                                                          7

     •    ACFT BATT lTO FLCSl – On.
                                                                 9
     •    ACFT BATT lFLCS RLYl – Off.
                                                                             8
     Verify lights on TEST Panel:
     •    FLCS PWR lAl, lBl, lCl, and lDl – On.                                  8
                                                                     6   2
                                                                         4
5.   FLCS PWR TEST switch – Release.                                 1   7
6.   MAIN PWR switch – MAIN PWR.
7.   Verify warning lights on Right Eyebrow:
     •    lENGINEl – On.
     •    lHYD/OIL PRESSl – On.                             4   3    5

     Verify lights on Caution Light Panel:
     •    lELEC SYSl – On.
     •    lSECl – On.
     Verify lights on ELEC Control Panel:
     •    ACFT BATT lFLCS RLYl – On.
     •    lEPU GENl and lEPU PMGl – Off.
          NOTE: Illumination of either light indicates criteria for EPU activation is met. The EPU will activate and
          create a hazardous condition if the EPU safety pin is removed by the ground crew. If either of these
          lights are illuminated, turn MAIN PWR switch to OFF and abort the aircraft (re-start the mission).
8.   Communications – Established with ground crew and Air Traffic Control (ATC) as required for engine start.
9.   Canopy – As desired.
10. Chocks – In place.
11. Ground crew – Clear of intake and other danger areas.
Engine Start
1.   JFS switch – START 2. The JET FUEL – RUN light
     illuminates within 30 seconds indicating the Jet
     Fuel Starter is operational. Engine RPM should
     start to increase.
     Power is applied to the Flight Control System relays                                          4
     when the JFS switch is set to either the START 1                                                      6
                                                                                              7
     or START 2 position. The ACFT BATT lFLCS RLYl                                                 8
     light should extinguish and the ACFT BATT                                                         9
     lTO FLCSl light should illuminate.                                                                10

2.   lSECl caution light – Off.                                                                        11

3.   Throttle – Advance to IDLE at 20% RPM minimum.                       4
                                                                                                               12
     Engine combustion should occur within a few
                                                                                               2       4
     seconds and engine RPM and FTIT should
     increase.
     NOTE: When starting on battery power only (no                    5
     external power applied), only the RPM and FTIT                   1
     engine instruments will function until the standby
     generator is online.                                         3


4.   lENGINEl warning light – Off (approximately 60%
     RPM, when the standby generator becomes
     operational).
5.   Verify the following to confirm the emergency
     busses are being powered by the standby
     generator.
     •    lSEAT NOT ARMEDl caution light – On.
     •    Three green WHEELS down lights – On.
     Within 5-10 seconds, the main generator will come online, and the standby generator will go offline.
Once engine RPM is at idle speed, perform the following checks.
6.   JFS switch – Confirm OFF; manually set to OFF if necessary.
7.   lHYD/OIL PRESSl warning light – Off.
8.   FUEL FLOW – 700-1700 PPH.
9.   Engine OIL pressure – 15 PSI or greater.
10. Engine NOZ POS – above 94%.
11. Engine RPM – 62%-80%.
12. Engine FTIT – 650° C or less.
13. HYD PRESS A & B – 2850-3250 PSI.
After Engine Start
1.   TEST switch panel – Check:
     •   PROBE HEAT switch – PROBE HEAT. Ensure
         lPROBE HEATl caution light is extinguished.
         If the light is illuminated, one or more probe
         heaters are inoperative or a failure of the
         monitoring system has occurred.

     •   PROBE HEAT switch – TEST. lPROBE HEATl
         caution light should flash 3-5 times per
         second.
         If this does not occur, the probe heat
         monitoring system is inoperative

     •   PROBE HEAT switch – OFF.

     •   FIRE & OHEAT DETECT button – Press.
         Ensure lENGINE FIREl warning light
         illuminates when the button is pressed.
         This checks for continuity of the fire and
         overheat detection loops.

     •   MAL & IND LTS button – Press. Ensure all
         cockpit warning, caution and indicator lights                                       3
         illuminate when the button is pressed.
                                                                                                 2
         A brief LG warning horn should be heard
         followed by Voice Message System (VMS)
                                                              1
         audio alerts, played in priority sequence
         (“PULL UP”, “ALTITUDE”, “WARNING”, etc.).

2.   AVIONICS POWER panel – Set:
     •   MMC switch – MMC.
     •   ST STA switch – ST STA.
     •   MFD switch – MFD.
     •   UFC switch – UFC.
     •   GPS switch – GPS.

3.   INS – Align. (See INS Alignment for more information.)
     •   DL switch – DL. (N/I)
     •   MIDS LVT knob – ON
              o    The MIDS LVT knob should only be set to ON after the GPS receiver has been powered and
                   the GPS timing signal has been received, indicated by “GPS SYSTEM” being displayed on
                   the TIME DED page.
4.   SNSR PWR panel:
     •    LEFT HDPT switch – As required. (If an HTS pod is installed, enable power to the hardpoint).
     •    RIGHT HDPT switch – As required. (If a targeting pod is installed, enable power to the hardpoint)
     •    FCR switch – FCR.
     •    RDR ALT switch – RDR ALT.

5.   HUD – As desired. Ensure the SYM knob on the
     ICP is rotated up to increase HUD brightness as
     necessary.

     (See HUD Control Panel for more information.)

6.   C & I knob – UFC.                                                                  5
                                                                                             13
7.   Secondary (SEC) engine control mode – Check.                                                     7
     (May be performed during Before Takeoff check.)
                                                                                                      7

     •    ENG CONT switch – SEC.
                                                                                    8         8
               o    lSECl caution light – On.                             12

               o    Engine RPM – Stabilized. RPM may
                                                                                                  7
                    drop up to 10% from PRI value
                                                                     11
                    before stabilizing. Stabilized SEC                                                    8
                    idle RPM may be up to 5% lower                                                        4
                    than that in PRI.
                                                                                                          5
                                                                     7
               o    Throttle – Snap to MIL, and then
                    snap to IDLE when RPM reaches                7       11
                                                                               10
                    85%. Check for normal indications
                    and smooth operation.                            6
               o    NOZ POS – 10% or less within 30
                    seconds after selecting SEC.                 9

     •    ENG CONT switch – PRI.
               o    lSECl caution light – Off.
               o    NOZ POS – Greater than 94%.

8.   Flight controls – Cycle to ensure maximum deflection of flight control surfaces prior to the FLCS BIT.

9.   FLCS BIT – Initiate and monitor.

     •    BIT switch – BIT. FLCS lRUNl light will illuminate for approximately 45 seconds until FLCS BIT
          completes.

     •    BIT switch will automatically return to OFF when FLCS BIT completes. Ensure FLCS lFAILl light is not
          illuminated when complete.

10. ECM panel – As required. (If an ECM pod is installed, set ECM power switch to STBY)

11. SPD BRK switch – Cycle to extended position and then retract.

12. WHEELS down lights – Three green.

13. Standby Attitude Indicator – Uncage and set.
14. FUEL QTY SEL knob – Check.

     •    TEST – FR and AL pointers should indicate
          2,000 (±100) pounds and the totalizer
          should indicate 6,000 (±100) pounds. Verify
          the lFWD FUEL LOWl and lAFT FUEL                                                             16
          LOWl caution lights illuminate on the                                    16
                                                                                        16                  17
          Caution Light Panel.
                                                                                   16             16
     •    NORM – AL pointer should indicate
          approximately 2,810 pounds and FR pointer
          should indicate approximately 3,250 pounds                                                        14
          (if fully-fueled with JP-8).
                                                                                        16   14
     •    RSVR – Each reservoir should indicate                                                              18
          approximately 480 pounds.                                       16                                     15
                                                                    16
     •    INT WING – Each wing should indicate
          approximately 550 pounds.
                                                                              16
     •    EXT WING – Each external wing tank should
                                                                              16
          indicate approximately 2,420 pounds, if full.

     •    EXT CTR – FR pointer should indicate
                                                                    16
          approximately 1,890 pounds, if full. AL
          pointer should indicate 0.                                                                                  16
                                                               17        18
     •    FUEL QTY SEL knob – As desired.

15. EPU FUEL quantity – 95-102%.

16. Avionics, MFD’s, and radios – Configure as required (manual configuration or data transfer cartridge).

After the FLCS BIT is complete:

17. DBU – Check.

     •    DIGITAL BACKUP switch – BACKUP. Verify lDBU ONl warning light illuminates

     •    Operate flight controls – Ensure all flight control surfaces respond normally.

     •    DIGITAL BACKUP switch – OFF. Verify lDBU ONl warning light extinguishes.

18. TRIM – Check.

     •    TRIM/AP DISC switch - DISC.

     •    Side Stick Controller TRIM switch - Activate in roll and pitch. Verify no movement of flight control
          surfaces and no TRIM wheel/indication motion on the FLT CONTROL Panel.

     •    TRIM/AP DISC switch - NORM.

     •    Side Stick Controller TRIM switch - Check and center. Verify movement of flight control surfaces and
          TRIM wheel/indication motion on the FLT CONTROL Panel.

     •    Rudder trim check - YAW TRIM knob check and center.
19. MPO – Check.

     •    Side Stick Controller – Full forward and hold;
          note horizontal tail deflection.
                                                                                        21
     •    MPO switch – OVRD and hold. Confirm that
          horizontal tail trailing edges deflect further
          downward.

     •    Stick and MPO switch – Release. Confirm
          that the horizontal tail returns to its original
          position.                                                       20            20

20. Operate controls – Verify all surfaces respond
                                                                    22
    normally and no FLCS lights illuminate.
                                                                                                  19
21. Air refueling system (if required) – Check.
                                                                                                  20
     •    AIR REFUEL switch – OPEN. Verify lRDYl                   19
          light illuminates and the lDISCl light remains
          off.

     •    AIR REFUEL switch – CLOSE. Verify lRDYl                  22
                                                             23
          light extinguishes.                                                                 23
                                                             21
22. lEPU GENl and lEPU PMGl lights – Confirm off. If
    either light is illuminated, cycle the EPU switch to      23
    OFF, then back to NORM. If either of these lights
    remain illuminated, abort the aircraft (re-start the
                                                             23
    mission).

23. EPU – Check. This check verifies EPU electrical
    power is available in case of an emergency. (May be performed during Before Takeoff check.)

     •    OXYGEN Diluter Lever – 100%.
     •    Throttle – Increase engine RPM 10% above normal idle.
     •    EPU/GEN TEST switch – EPU/GEN and hold.
     •    Verify lights on EPU Control Panel:
               o     lAIRl – On.
               o     EPU Run light – On, for a minimum of 5 seconds.
     •    Verify lights on ELEC Control Panel:
               o     lEPU GENl – Off; but may come on momentarily at start of test.
               o     lEPU PMGl – Off; but may come on momentarily at start of test.
     •    Verify lights on TEST Panel:
               o     FLCS PWR lAl, lBl, lCl, and lDl – On.
     •    EPU/GEN TEST switch – OFF.
     •    Throttle – IDLE.
     •    OXYGEN Diluter Lever – NORMAL.
TAXI
Once the engine is operating and the INS has been aligned, the aircraft may be taxied to the runway. Although
it is typical to initialize the remaining avionics systems and perform other pre-flight checks prior to taxi, it may
not be possible in a scenario in which the aircraft must be scrambled into the air without delay.
However, even if an immediate takeoff is required, some systems may be initialized or some checks may be
performed during the taxi itself, depending on the distance between the aircraft’s parking location and the active
runway. In such an instance, the priority should be given to those systems that ensure the aircraft is ready to
fight as soon as it is airborne.




When ready to taxi, ensure nosewheel steering is engaged by pressing the Missile Step button
on the Side Stick Controller (SSC), which may be confirmed by the illumination of the “AR NWS”
AR Status light on top of the Instrument Panel to the right of the HUD.
Nosewheel steering gain is proportional to ground speed. As speeds increases, the nosewheel
steering will become less sensitive for a given pedal input. However, due to the F-16’s narrow
landing gear “footprint”, care should be taken when turning on the ground to prevent a roll-
over and impacting either wingtip (or underwing stores), damaging the aircraft. If high-speed
taxi is necessary, the aircraft should be gently braked to a lower speed before turning.
Only small throttle inputs are necessary to begin a taxi roll, and even at IDLE the aircraft may start to roll forward
when operating at low gross weights. Once the desired taxi speed has been reached, retard the throttle back to
IDLE to prevent gradual and excessive acceleration.
NOTE: When starting a mission from parking with the aircraft engine running and systems initialized, the
following systems will be configured as shown.
     •    Nosewheel Steering (NWS) – Disengaged.
     •    ALR-56M Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) – Powered Off.
     •    CMDS MODE Knob – STBY.
     •    HMCS Symbology Knob – OFF.
Before Taxi
1.   Canopy – Close and lock.
                                                                                   9
2.   Backup UHF radio – Set and check as required.
                                                                                   10       3
3.   Altimeter and altitude indications – Set and check.
     Verify altitude displayed on the HUD matches the                                           8
     altitude on the altimeter.
                                                                                                10
     •    Check that the altimeter readings in ELEC and
          PNEU are ±75 feet of a known elevation and
          are ±75 feet of one another.                                                  3

4.   Exterior lights – As required.                                            8   10           8
                                                                                                     9
5.   INS knob – NAV. If a complete alignment is desired                            10
     prior to taxi, verify “RDY” is visible and flashing on
     the INS DED page and/or “ALIGN” is visible and                                                          8

     flashing in the lower left corner of the HUD.             1

     (See INS Alignment section for information.)                          2

6.   Chocks – Remove.
                                                                   7


Taxi
                                                                       4
7.   Throttle – Advance. A throttle setting just beyond                                                  5
     idle will be required to begin rolling. Return throttle
     to idle after desired speed is reached.
8.   Brakes and NWS – Check.
     Press the Missile Step button on the SSC to engage
     nosewheel steering (NWS). The lAR/NWSl AR status light to the right of the HUD should illuminate.
     Gently test the brakes and nosewheel steering immediately after the aircraft begins to move forward. Heat
     may build up quickly if brakes are used for an extended period so do not ride the brakes to control taxi
     speed. Use one firm application of the toe brakes to slow the aircraft.
9.   Heading – Check.
10. Flight instruments – Check for proper operation. Verify aircraft heading updates as the aircraft turns and
    that all instruments behave as expected.
TAKEOFF
The F-16C’s powerful F110-GE-129 engine affords the aircraft impressive acceleration at takeoff for its size. Even
when heavily loaded, the F-16C can accelerate quite rapidly when the afterburner is fully engaged. As a result, it
is critical that the pilot ensures the landing gear is fully retracted and the landing gear doors are closed prior to
exceeding 300 knots. This prevents wiring or other landing gear components from becoming detached or causing
damage to the landing gear doors.




A series of final checks are made just prior to entering the runway, to ensure the aircraft is properly configured
for flight, the ejection seat is armed, and to perform one final check for malfunctions within the flight controls.
Some airfields have arm/de-arm areas near the runway (often called
                                                                                                Final checks may be
“EOR” or “End of Runway” areas) that may be used to keep the
                                                                                              performed in designated
taxiway clear for other traffic. These checks may also be performed                           areas near the runways
while on the taxiway, in queue for takeoff.
Once aligned on the active runway, the brakes are applied and the
throttle is advanced no further than 90% RPM. This allows the pilot to
perform a final scan of the engine instruments to verify the engine is
operating as expected; a critical check for a single-engine fighter prior
to takeoff. Once this brief check is complete, the brakes are released
and the throttle advanced to either MIL or AB.
When departing as a flight, each aircraft takes off one at a time, in
short intervals, and then rejoins once airborne.
NOTE: When starting a mission on the runway for takeoff, the following systems will be configured as shown.
     •    Nosewheel Steering (NWS) – Disengaged.
     •    ALR-56M Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) – Powered Off.
     •    CMDS MODE Knob – STBY.
     •    HMCS Symbology Knob – OFF.
Before Takeoff
Prior to entering the runway for takeoff, perform the
following.
1.   ALT FLAPS switch – Verify NORM.
2.   Trim – Check.
                                                                                      6        6
     •    Pitch and yaw trim – Centered
     •    Roll trim - As required
     This is a final verification the trim settings are
     correct for takeoff and have not been inadvertently
     changed.
                                                                                                        7
3.   ENG CONT switch – Verify PRI (guard down).                                            8

4.   Speedbrakes – Verify closed.                                      9
                                                                                12
                                                                       4
5.   Canopy – Verify closed and locked.                            5

     •    Verify lCANOPY UNLOCKEDl caution light is
          not illuminated.                                             3
6.   IFF – Set and check. (N/I)
                                                                       13
7.   External fuel tanks – Verify feeding.
                                                                                                      10
     Wing external fuel tanks should feed first and have               6
     a lower quantity than at engine start. The internal
     wing tanks should be full.                                1            2

     If three external tanks are installed, verify that the
     centerline tank is feeding.                              11

8.   FUEL QTY SEL knob – NORM.
     The FUEL QTY SEL knob must be set to the NORM position to allow the automatic forward fuel transfer
     system, trapped fuel warning, and for the BINGO fuel warning computation to be based on fuselage fuel.
9.   STORES CONFIG switch – As required.
     •    CAT I: Air to Air loadouts without external wing tanks.
     •    CAT III: Air to Ground loadouts, or any loadout with external wing tanks.
10. OXYGEN SUPPLY lever – PBG (if high-G maneuvers are expected immediately following takeoff).
11. PROBE HEAT switch – PROBE HEAT.
     This should be done at least two minutes prior to takeoff if icing conditions exist. Manual activation of probe
     heat on the ground when icing is not expected may cause overheat and damage to probe components.
     Probe heat is automatically active once airborne.
12. Ejection safety lever – Down (Armed).
     This arms the ejection seat and allows ejection when the ejection handle is pulled. This is delayed for as
     long as possible to prevent inadvertent ejection on the ground. Egress through other means is usually
     preferable.
13. Flight controls – Cycle. This is to verify freedom of
    movement and ensure controls are not obstructed.
14. Engine OIL pressure – 15-65 PSI.
15. Warning and caution lights – Verify no
    unexpected conditions.                                                 15

16. Targeting pod – Stow (if installed).                              14
                                                            16   16
     Targeting Pod is stowed by selecting OVRD or
     STBY on the Targeting Pod Control Page.
                                                            13   13
     This is done prior to takeoff and before landing to
     prevent foreign object damage to components.
                                                                      15

                                                                           13
Takeoff
Once lined up for takeoff on the directed runway,
perform a final run-up check and initiate the takeoff roll:
1.   Brakes – Hold.
                                                                                                                 6
2.   Parking Brake – Verify disengaged.
3.   Throttle – 90% RPM. Check for normal engine                                                                                  3
     indications:                                                                                                             3
     •       HYD/OIL PRESS warning light – Off
                                                                                                                              3
     •       OIL pressure – 25-65 PSI
                                                                                                                                  3
     •       FTIT – 935° C or less                                                        1                       1
     •       HYD PRESS A & B – 2850-3250 PSI                                              4                       4

4.   Brakes – Release.                                                          2                                                      3
                                                                                      8                                               6
5.   Throttle – Advance to desired thrust.
                                                                                                                                  7
6.   NWS – Disengage at 70 knots (or as necessary to
     maintain controllability) to prevent oversteering.
                                                                            5
7.   Pull back on the stick 10 knots below takeoff speed
     for MIL power or 15 knots below takeoff speed for                      3

     AB and establish takeoff attitude (8–12°).(See
     chart below for takeoff speed)
     NOTE: Pulling back on the stick too soon may lead
     to over-rotation, skipping, or wallowing and will
     increase the distance needed to take off.
8.   LG Handle – UP; after a positive rate of climb is
     established. The trailing edge flaps retract at the
     same time as the landing gear and may cause the
     aircraft to settle and scrape the runway when lift is lost.
     NOTE: Ensure landing gear is fully retracted with the gear doors closed before exceeding 300 KCAS.

                              TAKEOFF SPEED BASED ON AIRCRAFT GROSS WEIGHT
 GROSS WEIGHT (GWT)             20,000 lbs.    24,000 lbs.   28,000 lbs.   32,000 lbs.    36,000 lbs.       40,000 lbs.               44,000 lbs.

TAKEOFF SPEED (KCAS)              128 kts        142 kts      156 kts       168 kts           178 kts         188 kts                     198 kts


                   Adjust pitch to takeoff attitude with                                       Maximum performance
              7   the Boresight Cross 8°-12° above the                                        climb may be performed
                   horizon (between 10° Attitude Bars)                                            once airborne and
                                                                                              landing gear is retracted




                                                                                                                          8

         5                          6                              7



                                                              Takeoff
Crosswind Takeoff
When taking off in a crosswind, the wind acting upon the vertical tail will create a “weathervane” effect, causing
the nose to turn into the wind. This will in turn raise the upwind wing, causing the aircraft to roll away from the
wind direction.
To counter the effects of the crosswind during the takeoff roll:
1.   Apply a slight amount of left/right stick pressure against the wind direction to keep the wings level.
2.   Apply slight rudder input with the wind, or as necessary, to keep the aircraft centered on the runway
     throughout the takeoff roll.
During the rotation to takeoff attitude, smoothly remove the countering rudder input as necessary to allow the
nose to weathervane back into the wind and establish a proper crab angle into the wind. With a proper crab
angle, the Flight Path Marker (FPM) should be aligned down the runway when becoming airborne.



               Wind from the left causes nose to                                Weathervane effect and nose
                weathervane left into the wind                                  rotation imparts a roll on the
                                                                                   aircraft away from wind




       Wind




                                                                     Roll pressure applied to the
                                                                      stick against the wind to
                                                                      maintain a level attitude



       Wind




      Pedal pressure applied with the
     wind to counter the weathervane
     effect and maintain ground track
                 down the




                                 Control inputs to counter crosswinds during takeoff
LANDING
Compared to other fighter aircraft, the F-16 can be somewhat difficult to land. Due to its aerodynamics and
narrow “footprint” of its landing gear, maintaining control throughout the final approach, touchdown and
deceleration can be a challenge for inexperienced pilots.
Depending on the type of approach to be flown, weather conditions, and the nature of the airfield and its
operations, a straight-in approach or an overhead break may be flown.




The F-16C relies on the combined effects of aerodynamic drag and main landing gear wheel brakes to decelerate
the aircraft after touchdown. Just prior to contact with the runway, the pilot raises the nose in a “flare” maneuver
to reduce the descent rate as much as possible. This flare maneuver is especially critical when landing with high
gross weights to prevent over-stressing the main landing gear, but it also allows the pilot to maintain a nose-high
attitude after touchdown for aerodynamic braking; instead of slamming the nose gear down onto the runway
following a touchdown with a high descent rate.
This type of landing, in which only the main landing gear
is used during the initial touchdown and roll-out, is called
a “two-point” landing. The pilot uses forward/aft stick
inputs to maintain the nose-high attitude, which
generates aerodynamic drag across the underside of the
wings and fuselage to decelerate the aircraft. The nose
is typically lowered around 100 knots to allow the nose
landing gear to contact the ground, after which the
wheel brakes on the main landing gear are used to bring
the aircraft to a stop.
Descent/Before Landing
Prior to committing to the approach, configure the
aircraft for landing:
1.   Fuel – Check quantity/transfer/balance.                           4       3


2.   Landing Light – On.
3.   Altimeter – Set and check.                                                    4

     Verify altitude displayed on the HUD matches the              6                   6
     altitude on the altimeter.
                                                                           3
     Check that the altimeter readings in ELECT and
                                                                       4
     PNEU are ±75 feet of a known elevation and are                                        1
     ±75 feet of one another.                                                  1

4.   Attitude References – Check.                              2

     Attitude indications for ADI, HUD and SAI should
     agree.
5.   ANTI ICE switch – As required.
6.   Targeting pod – Stow (if installed).
     Targeting Pod is stowed by selecting OVRD or
     STBY on the Targeting Pod Control Page.               1

     This is done prior to takeoff and before landing to                                       5

     prevent foreign object damage to components.
Overhead Break
The overhead break is a type of visual approach pattern used by military pilots to expedite landing procedures in
an efficient manner. These landings expedite the approach into an airfield by using a 180° turn at a low throttle
setting to rapidly deplete airspeed and can also be used to rapidly generate precise timing intervals between
wingmen when a formation of aircraft is coming in for landing.
                            2. Level Break



3. Downwind Leg




                                                                                                    1. Initial Approach


                                                        7. Short Final

             4. Base Turn
                                                                              6. Rollout on Final




                                                                         5. Final Turn




                                             Overhead Break Pattern

1.   Initial Approach. Upon initial approach to the airfield, align the aircraft with the landing runway at 1,500
     feet above ground level (AGL) and 300 knots calibrated airspeed (KCAS). When aligned with the runway,
     note the current aircraft heading on the HUD and calculate the reciprocal heading; this will be the heading
     for the downwind leg following the turn into the level break.
     As the intended landing area comes into view, it is recommended to visually identify one or multiple distinct
     reference points in the airfield environment that are adjacent to the intended touchdown point. The turn
     into the level break is normally initiated when directly over the intended touchdown point, but as this location
     will be directly below the aircraft and cannot be seen from within the cockpit, visual reference points directly
     abeam the touchdown location will allow the pilot to determine when the aircraft is indeed over the
     touchdown point. (see figure on the following page)
     Alternatively, if no visual reference points are available, the level break could be initiated once overhead the
     center of the airfield, or simply executed based on the pilot’s judgement of when it is appropriate to do so.
                  Bend in airfield road




     Circle pattern in field                Intended touchdown point       Distinct structures




                                          Visual reference points during initial approach

2.      Level Break. When the aircraft is overhead the touchdown point, roll the aircraft to approximately 70° of
        bank into the intended break direction, set throttle to about 80% RPM, and open the speedbrakes. Pull into
        the break at approximately 3 G. Adjust the attitude as necessary to keep the Flight Path Marker (FPM) on
        the HUD aligned with the Horizon Line to maintain a level altitude throughout the turn.
3.      Downwind Leg. Roll out on the downwind leg opposite the landing heading between 200-220 KCAS and
        1,500 feet AGL. Extend the landing gear and confirm three green WHEELS down lights are illuminated.
        Reduce speed as required to prevent excessive airspeed buildup in the base turn and trim to an Angle-of-
        Attack (AoA) of 11°.
4.      Base Turn. Initiate the base turn when abeam the intended point to rollout on final. This may be estimated
        by viewing the wingtip from the cockpit. Once the wingtip is at the end of the runway, lower the nose slightly
        so the FPM is between the -2.5° and -5° pitch ladder markers, enter a 30-45° bank angle and fly the turn
        at approximately 11° AoA, which will be toward the top of the AoA Bracket symbol.




                                                                                Wingtip has passed beyond
                                                                                  the end of the runway




                                            Wingtip reference for initiating base turn
5.   Final Turn. Use the throttle to control airspeed while using the Side Stick Controller to maintain the AoA at
     approximately 11-13° through the turn from base to final. Maintain a bank angle between 30-45°, or as
     necessary to ensure the aircraft is aligned with the runway upon roll-out.




                                         AoA Bracket        -2.5° pitch ladder markers




                                30-45° Bank Angle



                                                        Flight Path Marker



                            AoA and glide path references in base turn to final

6.   Rollout on Final. Roll out on final and adjust the controls to achieve the desired glide path and maintain
     the appropriate AoA. The intent is to roll out of the turn aligned with the runway, approximately one nautical
     mile from the touchdown point and 300 feet AGL. Align the HUD Flight Path Marker (FPM) and 2.5° pitch
     ladder with the runway threshold to ensure proper glide path while maintaining 11-13° AoA.




                                                -2.5° pitch ladder markers




                                          10° AoA


                                          16° AoA

                                                       Flight Path Marker



                                   AoA and glide path references on final

     If desired, the MAN RNG/UNCAGE knob may be depressed to the Un-cage position to declutter the lower
     portion of the HUD. When this occurs, the Heading Tape will be repositioned to the top portion of the HUD
     and the Roll Indicator will be removed (as will the ILS indicators if in use).
7.   Short Final. See Landing procedure on the following page.
Landing
1.   Rollout on Final. Align the HUD Flight Path Marker (FPM) and 2.5° pitch ladder markers with the runway
     threshold to ensure proper glide path while maintaining 11-13° AoA.
     NOTE: If necessary to perform a go-around for another approach and landing attempt, initiate the go-
     around prior to performing the flare over the runway.
     Go-around. Increase throttle, arrest the descent rate, and begin a climb. When a positive rate of climb is
     established, retract the landing gear. Ensure landing gear is fully retracted with the gear doors closed before
     exceeding 300 KCAS. Turn onto crosswind to re-enter the pattern when at the appropriate altitude to do so.
2.   Short Final. When crossing the runway overrun (the portion of the runway before the primary surface
     starts), apply aft pressure on the stick to shift the FPM forward to a point 300-500 feet further down the
     runway. Gently pull back on the stick to flare and reduce the descent rate but do not level off.
3.   Two-Point Touchdown. Retard the throttle to idle and touchdown with a maximum AoA of 13°. An AoA
     greater than 15° during the touchdown or aerodynamic braking may cause the speedbrakes, ventral fins,
     or engine nozzle to contact the runway. Use small inputs to the stick to avoid overcontrolling the aircraft.
4.   Two-Point Aerobraking. Maintain a nose-up attitude (13° maximum) for two-point aerodynamic braking
     until the airspeed has been reduced to approximately 100 knots.
     NOTE: A good reference to use for maximum aerobraking is the Roll Indicator. Adjust the back pressure on
     the stick so that the Horizon Line bisects the lower curve of the Roll Indicator, between the 0° tick mark and
     the pointer.
5.   Three-Point Roll-Out. At approximately 100 knots, reduce back pressure on the stick and lower the
     nosewheel to the runway. Apply moderate to heavy braking to slow the aircraft. After the nosewheel has
     compressed, the speedbrakes may be fully opened and full aft pressure on the stick may be applied for
     maximum braking effectiveness (for short-field landings). Engage nosewheel steering when below 30 knots
     unless it is required earlier to maintain ground track and/or prevent departure from the runway.
                                                                                               Bisect the Roll Indicator with
                                                                                               the Horizon Line between the
                                                                                                0° tick mark and the pointer




                                                                                               Maintain nose-high attitude
         FPM aligned within 11-13°           Flare to reduce rate of descent                  after touchdown (13° or less)
     1                                   2                                               3
         AoA range of AoA Bracket                just prior to touchdown                        for maximum aerobraking




                                                                    Go-arounds should be initiated
                                                                  prior to the flare over the runway.
         1

                                2
                                                   3                               4                                  5



                                      Short Final and Landing Roll-out
Crosswind Landing
When landing in a crosswind, the wind acting upon the vertical tail will create a “weathervane” effect, causing
the nose to turn into the wind. During the approach, maintain wings-level and allow the aircraft to crab with the
nose into the wind until touchdown.
At touchdown of the main landing gear, counter the effects of the crosswind during the landing roll-out:
1.   Immediately apply rudder input to remove the crab angle and maintain alignment down the runway, or use
     differential wheel braking as necessary, to keep the aircraft centered on the runway throughout the roll-out.
2.   Apply a slight amount of left/right stick pressure against the wind direction to keep the wings level.
3.   Perform the remainder of the landing roll-out with normal two-point aerobraking until below 100 knots or
     until aircraft control becomes difficult and nosewheel steering is necessary to maintain ground track down
     the runway.
Use caution when engaging nosewheel steering as a strong pedal input may cause an abrupt yaw when nosewheel
steering is engaged. If possible, center the rudder before engaging the nosewheel steering and then gently re-
apply rudder input as necessary to maintain ground track down the runway.


                                                                  Apply rudder to remove crab angle immediately
                                                                   after touchdown, and maintain ground track
                                                                     down the runway during landing roll-out




       Wind




                                                                     Roll pressure applied to the
                                                                      stick against the wind to
                                                                      maintain a level attitude



       Wind




      Pedal pressure applied with the
     wind to counter the weathervane
     effect and maintain ground track




                                 Control inputs to counter crosswinds during landing
AIRCRAFT SHUTDOWN
Once the aircraft is safely back on the ground and the flight is to be terminated, an After Landing check is
performed after departing the runway. This configures the aircraft for ground operations and makes the aircraft
safe to approach by ground personnel.
These checks may be configured while taxiing to the parking area or may be performed in designated arm/de-
arm areas immediately after departing the runway (often called “EOR” or “End of Runway” areas).




After arriving at the intended parking location, ground crews place wheel chocks to prevent any un-intended
aircraft movement and the pilot powers down the various avionics and aircraft systems.
Due to its small, lightweight airframe, the F-16 is not equipped with an integrated boarding ladder and relies on
the ground crew to place such equipment next to the cockpit for egress. The pilot secures his or her gear, climbs
out of the cockpit, discusses with the ground crew about any maintenance-related issues encountered during the
flight, and then departs for debriefing while the ground personnel regenerate the aircraft for future sorties.
After Landing
When clear of the runway, perform the following.
1.   PROBE HEAT switch – Verify OFF.
     Manual activation of probe heat on the ground
     when icing is not expected may cause overheat
     and damage to probe components.
2.   ECM Power switch – OFF.
                                                                       9
3.   Speedbrakes – Close.
                                                                       8
4.   Ejection Safety Lever – Safe (Up).
     The ejection seat is safed after landing to prevent
     inadvertent ejection. A ground egress is usually
     preferable to ejection in case of an emergency                        7
                                                                                   5
                                                                   4
     while on the ground.
                                                                               2
5.   IFF MASTER knob – STBY.
6.   LANDING/TAXI Light switch – As required.
7.   MASTER ARM and LASER ARM switches – OFF.                          3

     This should be accomplished before ground
     personnel approach the aircraft.
                                                               6




                                                           1
Engine Shutdown
After reaching the designated parking location, perform the following.
1.   C & I knob – BACKUP.
2.   HUD SYM knob – Minimize.
3.   SNSR PWR panel – Set:
     •    LEFT HDPT – OFF.
                                                                               2
     •    RIGHT HDPT – OFF.
     •    FCR – OFF.
     •    RDR ALT – OFF.

4.   AVIONICS POWER panel – Set:
     •    INS knob – OFF.
     •    MIDS LVT knob – OFF.
     •    DL switch – OFF. (N/I)
     •    GPS switch – OFF.
                                                                                                     3
                                                              10
     •    UFC switch – OFF.                                            6

     •    MFD switch – OFF.
                                                                   5
     •    ST STA switch – OFF.
                                                                   8       7
     •    MMC switch – OFF.                                                                1     9
                                                                       1
5.   Throttle – OFF.
                                                                                                     4
     NOTE: Wait at least 10 seconds after INS knob
     has been moved to OFF before shutting down the
     engine. This allows the INU to complete its
     shutdown sequence before the engine spools
     down and the generator drops offline.
6.   JFS RUN light – Confirm off.
7.   lEPU GENl and lEPU PMGl – Confirm off.
     Check after main generator power drops offline. Lights on may indicate impending activation of the EPU and
     a hazardous condition.
8.   MAIN PWR switch – OFF.
     Delay placing MAIN PWR switch to OFF until after engine rpm decreases through 20 percent. This delay
     should allow the exhaust nozzle to remain open and makes it easier for the crew chief to accomplish the
     post flight inspection.
9.   OXYGEN SUPPLY lever – OFF.
10. OXYGEN Diluter lever – 100%.
11. Canopy – Open.
AERIAL REFUELING
Aerial refueling enables the F-16 and other aircraft to extend their range beyond what may be achieved with
internal fuel or external fuel tanks without landing at an airfield to refuel. Aerial refueling is often critical when
performing trans-oceanic flights, conducting long-range sorties beyond the reach of airbases in friendly or allied
territory, or extending the duration of combat air patrols.




Even if additional fuel is not required to fly to the objective, execute the mission, and return to base, it may be
prudent to perform aerial refueling prior to committing to the objective area. This allows the pilot additional loiter
time over the objective, the option to conduct low-level ingress or egress at higher speeds, more liberal use of
the afterburner in combat, or provide additional options for any contingencies encountered during the mission.
Air-to-Air Refueling (AAR) tracks are areas within which aerial refueling
                                                                                                         Callsign
tanker aircraft, such as the KC-135, will orbit during a mission. These AAR
track locations are normally included within the mission briefing; however,                              Aircraft Type
the F10 map may also be referenced during the mission itself to aid in
                                                                                                         Altitude (MSL)
locating these aircraft (assuming the mission options allow such
information to be displayed on the F10 map). Aerial refueling tankers will
be designated by friendly aircraft icons marked with a “K”.
Alternatively, if an AWACS is on-station, a vector to the nearest tanker
may be requested over the AWACS radio frequency to aid in navigation to
an AAR track.
Approach and Rendezvous
When approaching the AAR track, prior to performing the rendezvous with
the tanker, a radio call should be made to the tanker crew to announce
an intent to refuel. The tanker crew will respond with their current altitude
and airspeed, and whether the receiving aircraft is cleared to the Pre-
Contact position. The receiving aircraft should ensure altitude separation
is established prior to entering the AAR track and visual or radar contact
has been made with the tanker aircraft prior to initiating the rendezvous.
When performing the rendezvous with the tanker, the closure speed and relative altitude should be closely
monitored. The approach should be made from behind and below. There may be other aircraft performing
refueling operations in the vicinity of the tanker, so caution should be exercised to avoid a mid-air collision.
     Approach from behind and               Progressively reduce     Other receiving
     below the tanker’s altitude              the closure rate     aircraft near tanker




                                   Approach and rendezvous with refueling tanker



Pre-refueling Checklist
Prior to completing the rendezvous with the tanker,
perform the following steps.
1.   MASTER ARM switch – OFF.
                                                                                                6
2.   LASER ARM switch – OFF.
                                                                                                4
3.   CMDS MODE knob – STBY.
4.   Emitters – Off or Standby:                                                             4
                                                                               2
     •      FCR – Set to STBY Mode.
                                                                                1
     •      ECM Power switch – STBY.
                                                                                                     3
     •      TACAN – Set to REC mode.
     •      RDR ALT switch – STBY.
     NOTE: Emitters should be disabled prior to
     reaching the Pre-contact position.                                                 3
                                                                                                         4
5.   AIR REFUEL switch – OPEN.
     This should be done 3-5 minutes prior to refueling
                                                                                        7
     if equipped with external fuel tanks to depressurize                       4
     the tanks and allow them to be filled.
                                                                       5
     NOTE: FLCS gains are set to takeoff/landing                                    8
     configuration when set to OPEN.
6.   AR Status Light – Verify lRDYl.
7.   HOT MIC/CIPHER switch – HOT MIC.
8.   Exterior Lights – As required. At night, exterior
     lights should be set to DIM and STEADY settings and the Anti-Collision light should be set to OFF.
Pre-contact Position
When cleared to Pre-contact position, the receiving aircraft lines up directly behind the tanker and matches its
speed. The Pre-contact position allows the boom operator to ensure they have positioned the boom for contact,
the refueling system is set to the appropriate transfer rate for the type of aircraft being refueled, and the boom
operator establishes their required visual reference points on the receiving aircraft below them.




                                                                                   “RDY” AR Status light is illuminated




          TOTAL fuel quantity displayed in HUD




As a technique, the BNGO page may be displayed on the DED
(and the HUD if desired), which will display the total fuel in a
cockpit location that is more conducive to maintaining a focus
on the tanker. This precludes the pilot from needing to look
down at the fuel quantity indicator in the cockpit.
(See BNGO DED Page for more information.)
To display the DED page directly on the HUD, set the
DED/PFLD switch to the DED DATA position on the HUD
Control Panel.
Once stable and ready to move in for refueling, the pilot in the receiving aircraft radios to the boom operator that
he/she is established in the Pre-contact position and is ready to move into the contact position.




Tanker’s speed is matched
  in Pre-contact position




                                                 Pre-contact Position
Contact Position
Once cleared to the Contact position by the boom operator, use small but smooth control inputs, with very slight
changes to the throttle. After a throttle adjustment, it is prudent to wait several moments to see the effects of
the change before making another.
Allow the boom to pass just left or right of the canopy, about 2 or 3 feet overhead. Continue to move forward
slowly, maintaining lateral alignment with the yellow stripe painted along the underside of the KC-135.
                                                                                               Longitudinal Director Lights




                                                                    Vertical Director Lights




                                                                                                Lateral Centerline Stripe

                                                       Contact Position

Use the director lights along the underside of the tanker’s forward fuselage to establish and maintain the Contact
position. The boom operator will “fly” the refueling boom using the boom-mounted control surfaces to align and
insert the boom into the F-16’s dorsal refueling receptacle.
The lights under the forward fuselage of the KC-135 are directive in nature, meaning they indicate to the pilot
the required corrections that must be made to remain within the ideal Contact position. The left row of lights
indicates vertical alignment, and the right row of lights indicates longitudinal alignment. Green lights indicate a
slight correction and red lights indicate the aircraft is at the limits of the boom’s travel within the Contact position.
•    Arrows that are biased toward the “D” or the “U” indicate a required correction “Down” or “Up”, respectively,
     and are corrected by slight forward/aft pressures on the stick.
•    Dashes that are biased toward the “F” or the “A” indicate a required correction “Forward” or “Aft”,
     respectively, and are corrected by small adjustments of the throttle.




                             Lights directing the pilot to adjust
                              position slightly up and forward
                                to remain in Contact position




                               Lights directing the pilot to
                             adjust position up and forward
                              to return to Contact position                                            Receiving aircraft drifting aft
                                                                                                       and low, away from KC-135



                                          KC-135 Director Light Corrections
When the boom has been seated within the receiving aircraft’s receptacle, the boom operator will announce
“Contact” and confirm positive fuel flow. When this occurs, the “AR NWS” AR Status light illuminates.



        Reference point for maintaining formation
        with KC-135 throughout refueling process




                                                                                  “AR NWS” AR Status light is illuminated

           Director lights provide vertical and
     longitudinal alignment within Contact position




           TOTAL fuel quantity displayed in HUD




Once refueling has begun, the receiving aircraft simply needs to maintain the Contact position relative to the KC-
135 and monitor the total fuel quantity. It is not wise to focus on the boom, nor should the pilot’s focus be solely
on the director lights or the cockpit indications for more than a brief moment. A good reference point for
maintaining formation with the KC-135 is the center fuselage along the trailing edge of the main wing roots. This
location is close enough to detect small deviations from the intended position before they become apparent on
the director lights, and the wing roots serve as an immediate attitude indicator of the KC-135 (which is especially
important as the tanker enters or rolls out from a turn within the AAR track). Occasional cross-checks of the
director lights, HUD flight information, total fuel quantity, and the lAR NWSl light should be conducted throughout
the refueling, but the primary focus should remain on the KC-135 itself.
Note that the flying characteristics of the aircraft will subtlety and continuously change as the aircraft takes on
fuel and the gross weight increases. This will cause the aircraft to drop away from the KC-135, requiring a slight
adjustment to the pitch attitude to maintain altitude. This will in turn increase the AoA of the aircraft, which will
require a slight adjustment of the throttle to counter the increase in drag and maintain airspeed.
It is possible to unintentionally disconnect at some point during the refueling process. If this
occurs, the lDISCl AR Status light will illuminate. The pilot may adjust the flight controls to re-
enter the correct alignment within the Contact position, at which the boom operator will repeat
“Contact” and confirm resumption of fuel flow, or the pilot may back away to the Pre-contact
position prior to approaching the Contact position again.
If it is necessary to disconnect from the tanker prior to receiving a full offload, the Missile Step
button may be pressed on the Side Stick Controller, which will disconnect the boom from the
refueling receptacle and illuminate the lDISCl AR Status light.
Once clear of the boom, the aircraft should be slowly backed away to the Pre-contact position while maintaining
alignment directly behind the tanker. Prior to leaving the Pre-contact position, ensure to visually scan the
immediate areas to the left and right of the tanker for other aircraft waiting to refuel, or wingmen waiting for you
to finish before departing from the tanker’s wing.
Breakaway Procedure
At any point during the refueling, if the distance and/or closure rate is such that a potential mid-air collision with
the tanker or the refueling boom is likely, the boom operator will call for an emergency breakaway maneuver by
stating “Breakaway, breakaway.” When an emergency breakaway is commanded, immediately apply forward
pressure on the stick to initiate a descent away from the tanker and retard the throttle to reduce airspeed and
gain separation. The maneuver should be deliberate and expeditious in nature, but not necessarily aggressive.




                                              Breakaway Maneuver

After completing a breakaway, the boom operator will clear the receiving aircraft back to the Pre-contact position
prior to resuming the refueling process, if necessary.


Post-refueling Checklist
After completing refueling and gaining a safe distance
from the tanker, perform the following.
1.   AIR REFUEL switch – CLOSE.
                                                                                                  4
2.   HOT MIC/CIPHER switch – OFF.
                                                                                                   6
3.   Fuel quantity – Check. Verify proper transfer and
     balance.
                                                                                     6
                                                                         8
4.   AR Status Lights – All off.
                                                                         7
5.   Exterior Lights – As required.
                                                                                                           3
6.   Emitters – As required:
     •    FCR – As required.
     •    ECM Power switch – As required.
                                                                                 9
     •    TACAN – As required.
                                                                                                               6
     •    RDR ALT switch – RDR ALT.
7.   MASTER ARM – As required.
                                                                                 2
                                                                         6
8.   LASER ARM – As required.
9.   CMDS MODE knob – As required.                                 1
                                                                             5
NAVIGATION
     NAVIGATION
NAVIGATION
The F-16C primarily navigates by an Inertial Navigation System (INS), which is aided by a Global Positioning
System (GPS) receiver, a Central Air Data Computer (CADC), and a navigation database of steerpoints within the
Modular Mission Computer (MMC). After power is applied to the aircraft, whether it be from the engine-driven
generator or an external power supply, the pilot must initiate an alignment of the INS. Once aligned, the INS will
continuously calculate the aircraft heading, attitude, altitude, and velocity within a 3-dimensional "system
navigation solution", which produces a horizontal navigation position as well as a vertical altitude position.
While in flight, the F-16C receives continuous position updates from GPS satellites for increased reliability and
precision of the INS system navigation solution. However, in the event GPS signals are unreliable or unavailable,
the INS system navigation solution may gradually accumulate small errors over time. In these instances, the INS
may be updated in flight by performing a Position Fix or an Altitude Calibration.


    Upper TACAN Antenna       GPS Antenna                             Radar Altimeter            Angle-Of-Attack Sensor
      (top of fuselage)     (top of fuselage)                    Transmit/Receive Antennas            (both sides)




                                                                                                                          Pitot Probe




                                                                                                                       Air Data Probe




              Total Temperature Probe           Marker Beacon Antenna      Lower TACAN Antenna         ILS Antenna
                                                                                                     (inside radome)


                                                      Navigational Sensors

The F-16C also utilizes several external sensors to supply data to the Flight Control Computer (FLCC) and the
Central Air Data Computer (CADC).
•    A nose-mounted pitot probe provides static and total air pressure data to the CADC and FLCC, and drives
     the analog Altimeter and Airspeed/Mach Indicator on the Instrument Panel.
•    A side-mounted air data probe also provides static and total air pressure data to the CADC and FLCC, along
     with angle-of-attack (AOA) and sideslip data.
•    A pair of AOA transmitters on either side of the nose provide proportional AOA data to the FLCC.
•    A pair of static pressure ports on either side of the nose provide differential sideslip data to the FLCC.
•    A total temperature probe along the underside of the right leading-edge extension provides analog
     temperature data to the CADC for computing true airspeed and air density.
During operations in low-visibility conditions, the F-16C is equipped with Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) capability
through its MIDS LVT terminal, Instrument Landing System (ILS) and Marker Beacon radio receivers, and a
Combined Altitude Radar Altimeter (CARA) for precisely measuring the aircraft altitude above ground level (AGL).
INERTIAL NAVIGATION SYSTEM (INS)
The Inertial Navigation System is the primary navigation system of the F-16C. Once aligned, the INS utilizes
internal accelerometers and gyroscopic sensors to track the aircraft orientation and position in three dimensions,
which provides aircraft heading, attitude, altitude, velocity, and horizontal and vertical steering for navigation.
The INS also receives data from Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites for increased reliability and precision.




The combined values of aircraft orientation, position, and velocity are output from the INS as the "system
navigation solution" and are utilized by various onboard systems. In addition to navigation steering, the system
navigation solution also determines the orientation and position accuracy of aircraft sensors, information
transmitted across the datalink, calculating weapon ballistics, or targeting data transferred to precision munitions.
Three navigation solutions are separately maintained within the onboard Modular Mission Computer (MMC):
•    INS-only solution, which utilizes inertial data from the gyros and accelerometers within the INS itself.
•    GPS-only solution, which utilizes position and timing signals received from GPS satellites.
•    Blended solution, which utilizes a Kalman filter within the MMC to combine the data from the INS and GPS.
Prior to any flight, an INS “alignment” must be performed to ensure the accelerometers and gyros within the INS
itself are properly calibrated to the aircraft’s true position, orientation, and velocity. As inertial-based navigation
systems are prone to errors that gradually accumulate over time, a lower quality alignment produces less accurate
calculations of the aircraft’s navigation solution. As a result, a lower quality alignment will accumulate greater
errors within a shorter amount of time compared to a higher quality alignment.
If necessary, the pilot may correct errors that have accumulated within the INS by performing a Position Fix to
correct horizontal errors within the INS-only solution or an Altitude Calibration to correct vertical errors within the
INS-only altitude. However, in the event that the pilot must perform a correction to the navigation steering to
ensure weapon delivery calculations and symbology are properly aligned with the intended target, but there are
no locations suitable to perform a fix or there is insufficient time to do so, a temporary “cursor slew” may be
performed in lieu of performing an actual update to the navigation system.
(See Navigation Solutions and Navigation Updates for more information)
INS Alignment
Three types of INS alignments may be performed, which may be selected on the AVIONICS POWER control panel.
If performing a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment or a Stored Heading Alignment, it is imperative that the aircraft
is not moved or repositioned in any way, to include reconfiguring externally mounted equipment or arming/re-
arming any weapons stations.
Normal Gyrocompass Alignment. Aligns the INS within ~8 minutes to full position confidence.
Stored Heading Alignment. Rapidly aligns the INS within ~90 seconds, but requires the aircraft not be moved
if the INS is powered off following a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment.
In-Flight Alignment. Permits an INS alignment while in flight but requires a level flight attitude at a constant
speed and heading while the alignment proceeds. GPS data is required to achieve a reliable alignment quality.
NOTE: When a DCS mission begins in which the player must start the F-16 themselves, the aircraft will always
have been pre-aligned by the ground crew, allowing the player to perform a Stored Heading Alignment if desired.
Prior to initiating an alignment, the following criteria must be met.
•    The AC bus is powered by the engine-driven main or standby generators or by external power supply.
•    The Modular Mission Computer is enabled via the MMC switch on the AVIONICS POWER control panel. The
     EHSI will be powered but will display the INU flag, indicating the INS is not providing data.
•    The Upfront Controls (ICP and DED) are enabled via the UFC switch on the AVIONICS POWER control panel.
     The DED will initialize to the CNI page.
•    If performing a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment, the Altimeter on the Instrument Panel is set to the primary
     operating mode by momentarily holding the mode switch to the ELEC position until the PNEU flag is removed,
     and the Altimeter itself is calibrated to the airfield elevation by adjusting the barometric setting knob. This
     step is not required if performing a Stored Heading Alignment.


INS Initialization
The INS knob sets the operating mode of the Inertial
Navigation System and initializes an alignment.
•    OFF. Removes power from the INS. The INS knob
     should remain in this position on aircraft power for
     a minimum of 10 seconds before moving the INS
     knob from OFF or shutting down the aircraft.
•    ALIGN – STOR HDG. Initiates an alignment using
     previous alignment data stored within the MMC.
•    ALIGN – NORM. Initiates an alignment from
     manually input position data.
•    NAV. Sets the INS to normal navigation
     functionality after an alignment has been performed.
•    IN FLT ALIGN. Initiates an alignment using GPS data or a manual position fix to attain position data.
•    ATT. Provides backup pitch, roll, and heading information only and is used if the INS alignment is no longer
     usable for navigation but the attitude data is still valid. Navigation data will be unavailable except TACAN.
When performing an alignment of the INS, the INS DED page allows the pilot to monitor the status of the
alignment and, when used in conjunction with the ICP, allows the pilot to input position, altitude, and heading
data if required for the type of alignment that is being performed.
INS DED Page
The Inertial Navigation System DED page is accessed by pressing the 6/TIME button on the ICP keypad when
the LIST DED page is displayed. The DED will automatically display this page any time a Normal Gyrocompass
Alignment or a Stored Heading Alignment is initiated by setting the INS knob to the respective positions on the
AVIONICS POWER control panel. This page displays the position, altitude, true heading, and ground speed within
the INS-only solution.
                       1. Alignment Time/Status                                        2. RDY Status Message



                     3. Latitude                                                                      8. Selected Steerpoint

                    4. Longitude
                                                                                                      9. DED Asterisks
            5. System Altitude
                                                                                                      7. Ground Speed
              6. True Heading



                                                                                               Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                                   Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                     Reject
                                                                                 Return DED                              Cycle DED to INS
                                     Accept                                      to CNI page                             INFLT ALGN page




                           Operate                Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                               to the next data field


1.   Time Into Alignment/Alignment Status. The value to the left of the slash indicates the elapsed time in
     minutes that the alignment has been underway (e.g., a displayed value of “1.6” indicates approximately 1
     minute and 36 seconds).
     The value to the right of the slash provides an indication as to the state of alignment that has been achieved.
     As the alignment proceeds, this value will decrement downward, indicating the following states.
     •    99. An alignment of the INS has not been performed.
     •    98-91. The INS inertial platform is being leveled and the aircraft true heading is being attained.
     •    90. The INS has attained accurate attitude data and coarse alignment begins. This status is typically
          achieved within 30 seconds after an alignment has been initialized.
     •    79-63. The INS is performing a coarse alignment.
     •    62. The INS has attained a coarse alignment state that is usable for navigation, albeit with much
          greater inaccuracy compared to a fully aligned state.
     •    60-11. The INS is performing a fine alignment, indicated by a Circular Error Probability (CEP) multiplier.
          A CEP multiplier of 10 corresponds with the precision of a fully aligned state of 1.0, and a CEP multiplier
          of 60 corresponds with a precision error 6.0 times that of a fully aligned state. As the alignment status
          decrements, the CEP is reduced to indicate an increase in INS alignment accuracy.
     •    10. The INS has attained a fine alignment state with a fully aligned CEP factor of 1.0.
2.   RDY Status Message. If a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment or a Stored Heading Alignment is being
     performed, “RDY” will be displayed to the right of the alignment status to indicate that the INS has attained
     the minimum alignment state that is required for navigation.
3.   Latitude (LAT). Displays the latitude of the aircraft as output by the INS, in DD°MM.M’ format. When
     performing a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment, may be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data
     field, inputting a value in DDMMMMM format using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Longitude (LNG). Displays the longitude of the aircraft as output by the INS, in DDD°MM.M’ format. When
     performing a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment, may be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data
     field, inputting a value in DDDMMMMM format using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   System Altitude (SALT). Displays the system altitude of the aircraft, in feet above mean sea level (MSL).
     The system altitude may be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value
     using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
     NOTE: If performing a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment, the INS-only altitude is initialized based on the
     CADC altitude. Therefore, prior to initiating the INS alignment, it is important that the pilot ensures the
     Altimeter on the Instrument Panel is set to ELEC operating mode and calibrated to the airfield elevation by
     adjusting the barometric setting knob. This ensures the INS-only altitude is accurately initialized to the
     aircraft altitude above mean sea level (MSL). (See System Altitude for more information.)
6.   True Heading (THDG). Displays the true heading of the aircraft as output by the INS. The aircraft magnetic
     heading is then subsequently derived based on the magnetic variation setting on the MAGV DED page.
7.   Ground Speed (G/S). Displays the ground speed of the aircraft as output by the INS, in nautical miles per
     hour (knots).
8.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
9.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Indications of a Coarse/Fine Alignment
When performing a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment or a Stored Heading Alignment, and a coarse, but usable,
alignment state has been attained by the INS, the INS DED page will display “RDY” to the right of the alignment
state and the HUD will display “ALIGN” in place of the Maximum G value. These indicate to the pilot that the INS
has reached a minimum alignment quality with which navigation may possible.
When performing a Normal
Gyrocompass Alignment or a
Stored Heading Alignment,
and the INS has reached a
fully aligned state, “RDY” and
“ALIGN” will flash to indicate
the alignment is complete.
When performing an In-Flight
Alignment, the HUD will
display “ALIGN” in place of                                                          Indicates the INS has reached
                                                                                     a coarse alignment state when
the Maximum G value when                                                             displayed; or a fine alignment
true heading data of the                                                                  state when flashing.
aircraft has been attained by
the INS.
If the INS automatically
enters AUTO-NAV mode, the
INS knob is manually set to
the NAV position, or an In-
Flight Alignment has reached
a fully aligned state, “RDY”
and “ALIGN” will be removed
from the INS DED page and
the HUD, respectively.                            Indications of a Coarse/Fine Alignment
INS INFLT ALGN DED Page
The INS In-Flight Alignment DED page is accessed by pressing the 6/TIME button on the ICP keypad when the
LIST DED page is displayed, and then momentarily setting the ICP DCS switch to the SEQ position. The DED will
automatically display this page any time an In-Flight Alignment is initiated by setting the INS knob to the IN FLT
ALIGN position on the AVIONICS POWER control panel. This page allows the pilot to manually input the magnetic
heading of the aircraft if performing an In-Flight Alignment without GPS-aiding.
During an In-Flight Alignment with GPS-aiding, the aircraft position and altitude data is derived solely from the
GPS data. However, if GPS data is not available, the FIX NECESSARY message will be displayed to indicate that
a Position Fix must be performed to complete the alignment. (See In-Flight Alignment for more information.)

                                                                                          2. Selected Steerpoint


           1. Compass Heading
                                                                                          3. DED Asterisks




             Modify                            Cycle to next steerpoint                   No function


                                   Reject
                                                                            Return DED                       Cycle DED to
                                   Accept                                                                     INS page
                                                                            to CNI page




                         Operate             Cycle to previous steerpoint                 No function



1.   Compass Heading. Displays the magnetic heading of the aircraft, which may be converted to true heading
     based on the magnetic variation displayed on the MAGV DED page, to achieve initial heading data for an
     inflight alignment. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a compass
     heading without any leading zeros (in degrees magnetic) using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
     NOTE: The Magnetic Compass on the Right Auxiliary Console may be used as a magnetic heading reference.
2.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
3.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
MAGV DED Page
The Magnetic Variation DED page is accessed by pressing the 2/ALOW button on the ICP keypad when the
MISC DED page is displayed on the DED. This page displays the magnetic difference between true heading and
magnetic heading, which varies globally based on location. The magnetic variation setting may be automatically
determined based on a data table stored within the aircraft, or manually input using the ICP.
                     1. Magnetic Variation Mode


                                                                                                        3. Selected Steerpoint


           2. Magnetic Variation
                                                                                                        4. DED Asterisks




                                                                                               Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                                   Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                   Reject
                                                                                 Return DED                              Toggle between
                                   Accept                                        to CNI page                             AUTO and MAN




                         Operate                  Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                               to the next data field


1.   Magnetic Variation Mode. Displays the source of magnetic variation data used to convert true heading
     data from the INS to magnetic heading. May be toggled between AUTO and MAN by momentarily pressing
     the ICP DCS switch to the SEQ position.
     •    AUTO. Conversions are performed based on data tables stored within the aircraft memory. The
          magnetic variation cannot be edited by the pilot but is automatically updated as necessary based on
          the geographical position of the aircraft.
     •    MAN. Conversions are performed based on the Magnetic Variation value manually input on this page.
          The magnetic variation may be edited by the pilot but will not be automatically updated based on the
          aircraft geographical position.
2.   Magnetic Variation. Displays the magnetic variation value that is used to convert true heading to magnetic
     heading. If the Magnetic Variation Mode is set to MAN, may be modified by placing the DED asterisks over
     the data field, inputting a magnetic variation using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
     The format for entry includes keypad buttons 4 for West or 6 for East, followed by the variation value itself
     to the tenth of a degree, with a leading zero if necessary, in one continuous string without the decimal. As
     an example, a magnetic variation of “E05.5” would be input as “6055”, followed by ENTR.
3.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
4.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Normal Gyrocompass Alignment (NORM)
When performing a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment, the current latitude,
longitude, and altitude of the aircraft must be input within two minutes after the
alignment has been initiated. The true heading is determined automatically.
If any of these data values are accurate in that they already reflect the current
latitude, longitude, and/or altitude of the aircraft, they must still be confirmed by
setting the DED asterisks around the data field and pressing ENTR on the ICP. If
the latitude, longitude, and altitude are not input (or confirmed) within two
minutes after the alignment has been initiated, the alignment will fail and will
automatically restart.
To complete a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment of the
INS, perform the following:                                                                          Latitude entry
1.   INS Knob – ALIGN NORM. The DED will
     automatically display the INS page.
2.   ICP Keypad – Input 2 for N (North) or 8 for S
     (South).
3.   ICP Keypad – Input Latitude in DD°MM.M’ format,                               Steps 2 and 3
     which is input as DDMMM in a continuous string of
     five numbers.
                                                                                                   Longitude entry
4.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
     RCL to reject it and input different data.
5.   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
     around LNG data field.
6.   ICP Keypad – Input 6 for E (East) or 4 for W (West).
                                                                                   Steps 6 and 7
7.   ICP Keypad – Input Longitude in DDD°MM.M’
     format, which is input as DDDMMM in a continuous
     string of six numbers, to include a leading zero if                                             Altitude entry
     necessary.
8.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
     RCL to reject it and input different data.
9.   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
     around SALT data field.                                                            Step 10

10. ICP Keypad – Input Altitude in feet.
11. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it and input different data.
                                                                                                   RDY displayed
The alignment will continue regardless of whether the
INS page is displayed on the DED. When the INS
alignment status decrements to 62 (typically within 2
minutes or less), “RDY” will be displayed on the INS DED
page and “ALIGN” will be displayed in the bottom left
corner of the HUD in place of the Maximum G value.
AUTO-NAV Mode
If a degraded alignment has been attained, and the INS detects any movement of the aircraft, whether it be from
taxiing the aircraft or if external stores are being reconfigured by the ground crew, the INS will automatically
enter NAV mode internally even if the INS knob is still in the NORM position.
When AUTO-NAV is entered, the following will occur:
     •    “RDY” is removed from the INS DED page.
     •    “ALIGN” is removed from the HUD and replaced by the Maximum G value.
     •    The Time Into Alignment will stop incrementing.
     •    The Alignment Status will stop decrementing.
NOTE: Even if the INS enters AUTO-NAV, the INS knob must be manually set to the NAV position prior to takeoff.
NARF Mode
If the INS knob is still set to the NORM position after the INS has entered AUTO-
NAV mode and the INS no longer detects aircraft motion, the INS will
automatically initialize a pseudo-alignment mode called Nav Auto Realign Feature
(NARF). When NARF is active, the INU will continue to refine the alignment quality
as long as the aircraft is stationary.
When NARF is activated, the following will occur:
     •    The Time Into Alignment will resume incrementing.
     •    The Alignment Status will resume decrementing.
Manually Resuming Normal Gyrocompass Alignment
If a degraded alignment has been attained (indicated by “RDY” on the INS DED
page and “ALIGN” in the HUD), the alignment may be manually interrupted by
rotating the INS knob to the NAV position. This will allow the aircraft to be taxied
and/or allow the ground crew to reconfigure the external stores.
When the aircraft is once again truly stationary and/or the ground crew has
finished reconfiguring the external stores, rotate the INS knob back to the NORM
position to resume the Normal Gyrocompass Alignment.
If the INS entered AUTO-NAV mode and then subsequently entered NARF mode,
rotating the INS knob momentarily to the NAV position and then back to NORM
will disable NARF and resume the Normal Gyrocompass Alignment.
Accepting the Alignment
When the INS alignment status reaches a state of 10
(typically within 8 minutes), “RDY” will begin to flash on
the INS DED page and “ALIGN” will begin to flash in the
HUD. This indicates that the alignment is complete.                                                Alignment
                                                                                                   complete
12. INS Knob – NAV.
Stored Heading Alignment (STOR HDG)
When performing a Stored Heading Alignment, the INS will utilize the previous
alignment data stored within the MMC to perform a rapid alignment. This may be
useful in the event the aircraft must depart in a hasty manner, but requires a
Normal Gyrocompass Alignment to have been completed prior to the aircraft being
shut down in its current position.
NOTE: Unlike a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment, the aircraft position is not input
nor confirmed when the alignment is initiated. However, any movement of the
aircraft, to include reconfiguring the external stores, will still incur a degraded or
failed alignment.
To complete a Stored Heading Alignment of the INS,
perform the following:
1.   INS Knob – ALIGN STOR HDG. The DED will
     automatically display the INS page.
The alignment will continue regardless of whether the
INS page is displayed on the DED. When the alignment
status decrements to 62 (typically within 2 minutes or
less), “RDY” will be displayed on the INS DED page and
“ALIGN” will be displayed in the bottom left corner of the
HUD in place of the Maximum G value.
AUTO-NAV Mode
If a degraded alignment has been attained and the INS                                           RDY displayed
detects any movement of the aircraft, whether it be from
taxiing the aircraft or if external stores are being
reconfigured by the ground crew, the INS will
automatically enter NAV mode internally even if the INS
knob is still in the STOR HDG position.
When AUTO-NAV is entered, the following will occur:
     •    “RDY” is removed from the INS DED page.
     •    “ALIGN” is removed from the HUD and replaced by the Maximum G value.
     •    The Time Into Alignment will stop incrementing.
     •    The Alignment Status will stop decrementing.
NOTE: Even if the INS enters AUTO-NAV, the INS knob must be manually set to the NAV position prior to takeoff.
Interrupting Stored Heading Alignment
If a Stored Heading Alignment is interrupted, even after a degraded alignment has been attained, the alignment
cannot be resumed, nor can the INU enter Nav Auto Realign Feature (NARF). The aircraft must remain stationary
throughout the entire alignment process, otherwise the alignment must be restarted. Alternatively, if GPS signals
are available, the degraded alignment may be accepted if an in-flight alignment can be performed after takeoff.
Accepting the Alignment
When the INS alignment status reaches a state of 10
(typically within 90 seconds), “RDY” will begin to flash
on the INS DED page and “ALIGN” will begin to flash in
the HUD. This indicates that the alignment is complete.                                              Alignment
                                                                                                     complete
2.   INS Knob – NAV.
In-Flight Alignment (IN FLT ALIGN) with GPS-aiding
When performing an In-Flight Alignment with the aid of GPS data, whether in-
flight or stationary on the ground, the GPS receiver must be powered and have
an unobstructed line-of-sight to the sky to obtain data from multiple GPS satellites
(i.e., the aircraft cannot be inside a hardened aircraft shelter).
(See In-Flight Alignment without GPS-aiding if GPS data is not available.)
NOTE: During the initial stage of an In-Flight Alignment in which the INS inertial
platform is being leveled and true heading is being attained, the aircraft must be
maintained in a level, unaccelerated flight state, or remain stationary on the
ground, to minimize INS degradation.
To complete an In-flight Alignment with the aid of GPS,
perform the following:
1.   Establish level flight at a constant heading, altitude,
     and airspeed using backup instruments; or remain
     stationary on the ground.
2.   INS Knob – IN FLT ALIGN. The DED will
     automatically display the INS INFLT ALGN page and
     “STBY” will be displayed in lower left corner of the
     HUD in place of the Maximum G value.
     When true heading is attained by the INS (typically
     within 20 seconds), “STBY” will be replaced by
                                                                                        True heading
     “ALIGN” in the lower left corner of the HUD.                                      attained by INS

3.   (Optional) ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to display the
     INS page and monitor the alignment status.
The alignment will continue regardless of whether the
INS page is displayed on the DED.
Accepting the Alignment
When the INS alignment status reaches a state of 10,
“ALIGN” will be replaced by “NAV” in the lower left corner
of the HUD. This indicates that the alignment is
complete.                                                                                   Alignment
                                                                                            complete
4.   INS Knob – NAV.
In-Flight Alignment (IN FLT ALIGN) without GPS-aiding
An In-Flight Alignment may be performed without the aid of GPS data. However,
the quality of the alignment will be severely degraded. In addition, a recognizable
landmark must be near the aircraft’s flight path, and saved as a steerpoint within
the navigation database, to which a Position Fix may be performed.
(See In-Flight Alignment with GPS-aiding if GPS data is available.)
NOTE: During the initial stage of an In-Flight Alignment in which the INS inertial
platform is being leveled and true heading is being attained, the aircraft must be
maintained in a level, unaccelerated flight state, or remain stationary on the
ground, to minimize INS degradation.
To complete an In-flight Alignment without the aid of
GPS, perform the following:                                     Manually input
                                                               magnetic heading
1.   Establish level flight at a constant heading, altitude,
     and airspeed using backup instruments; or remain
     stationary on the ground.
2.   INS Knob – IN FLT ALIGN. The DED will
     automatically display the INS INFLT ALGN page and                                Step 3
     “STBY” will be displayed in lower left corner of the
     HUD in place of the Maximum G value.
3.   ICP Keypad – Input the magnetic heading of the
     aircraft, without leading zeros (e.g., 045° would be
                                                                                                True heading
     input as “45”).                                                                           attained by INS

4.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
     RCL to reject it and input different data.
     When true heading is attained by the INS (typically
     within 20 seconds), “STBY” will be replaced by
     “MAN” in the lower left corner of the HUD.
5.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to display the INS page and
     monitor the alignment status.                                                                  Perform
                                                                                                   position fix
6.   ICP DCS Switch – RTN when the alignment state
     reaches 75.
7.   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX. Perform a position fix
     using the FCR or TGP to attain position and velocity
     data. (See Performing a Position Fix for more
     information.)
The alignment will continue regardless of whether the
INS page is displayed on the DED.
Accepting the Alignment
When the INS alignment status reaches a state of 10,
“MAN” will be replaced by “NAV” in the lower left corner
of the HUD. This indicates that the alignment is
complete.                                                                                           Alignment
                                                                                                    complete
8.   INS Knob – NAV.
Attitude Mode (ATT)
When operating in Attitude mode, the INS will only provide pitch, roll, and heading information and will not
provide navigation data, requiring the pilot to solely rely on TACAN for navigation or even dead reckoning using
time/distance/heading calculations. This mode may be used if an immediate takeoff is required that does not
permit the INS to attain a coarse alignment, or if the INS position and/or velocity accuracy has degraded to the
extent that it is no longer useable for navigation but the attitude and heading data remain valid.
The INS may be set to Attitude mode by setting the INS knob to the ATT position
on the AVIONICS POWER control panel. However, the INS will automatically enter
ATT mode internally, regardless of the INS knob position, under any of the
following conditions.
     •    A Normal Gyrocompass Alignment or a Stored Heading Alignment is
          being performed and aircraft motion is detected before a coarse
          alignment can be attained.
     •    A Normal Gyrocompass Alignment or a Stored Heading Alignment is
          being performed and the INS knob is set to the NAV position before a
          coarse alignment can be attained.
     •    An In-Flight Alignment is being performed.
                                               When the INS is set to Attitude mode, the EHSI will display a yellow
                                               ATT flag but will continue to provide magnetic heading indication.
                                               However, the EHSI will only display navigation data provided by
                                               TACAN or ILS radio signals; the EHSI will not provide bearing,
                                               range, or course deviation information to any steerpoints.
                                               If the EHSI Magnetic Heading Compass is suspected to be
                                               misaligned or inaccurate, the compass may be manually adjusted
                                               by depressing the HDG knob, and then rotating the knob as
                                               required to correct any misalignment.




Attitude-only Alignment Quality
Although Attitude mode does not require the INS attain a coarse alignment, it does require that the INS attain
valid heading and attitude data. When performing a ground alignment, this is normally attained within 30 seconds
after the alignment has been initialized, when the Alignment State on the INS DED page indicates a value of 90.
If an immediate takeoff is necessary before a coarse alignment can be attained, the INS may be set to Attitude
(ATT) Mode after valid heading and attitude data is attained and the alignment status decrements to 90, but the
HUD Flight Path Marker (FPM) will not be functional and will remain frozen at the Boresight Cross. In addition,
the Pitch Ladder will not provide an indication of sideslip or wind drift, regardless of whether Drift Cut-Out (DRIFT
C/O) has been enabled on the Integrated Control Panel (ICP).
The Scales switch on the HUD Control Panel may be set to the VV/VAH position to display the Vertical Velocity
scale in the HUD, which provides an indication of a climb or descent in lieu of the FPM.
Navigation Solutions
Prior to the introduction of satellite-based navigation such as GPS, military aircraft were reliant on inertial
navigation systems (INS) to track and maintain their estimated position anywhere in the world. Based on inertial
measurements of attitude, velocity, and acceleration, the position of the aircraft would be continuously and
automatically updated without relying on radio-based navigational aids such as TACAN. However, even with the
most sophisticated and reliable INS, errors will gradually accumulate from electronic noise within the
accelerometers and imperfections in the alignment, leading to “drift” in the estimated position of the aircraft
compared to its true physical location. As a mission progresses, this drift may cause significant errors in navigation
and targeting as the aircraft’s estimated position (referred to as the navigation solution) continues to diverge
further from where the aircraft is truly located at any given time.

                                                                                   INS Estimated
                                                                                      Position
                                                                                                          True Aircraft
                                                                                                            Position




                                           INS Accumulation of Errors

Using position signals received from Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites in orbit around the Earth,
navigation accuracy can be maintained throughout the mission by applying corrections derived from the GPS
constellation. The F-16C’s Modular Mission Computer (MMC) utilizes the Kalman filter algorithm to mathematically
incorporate both the INS and GPS data into a “blended” navigation solution to achieve the stability and autonomy
of INS and the precision of GPS. However, such corrections are only applied if the difference, or “delta”, between
the INS-only and GPS-only solutions exceeds 300 feet (91 meters). If the delta is less than 300 feet, the MMC
will not apply any correction and the system navigation solution will remain solely based on the INS-only solution.

                                                                                             Blended
                 INS/GPS Δ=23 ft                                                            Navigation
              No correction applied                                                          Solution
                                                     INS/GPS Δ=148 ft
                                                   No correction applied




                                                                                   INS/GPS Δ=309 ft
                                                                                 GPS correction applied



                                            INS/GPS Δ=276 ft
                                          No correction applied



                                           INS/GPS Blended Solution

The estimated accuracy of the navigation system may be viewed on the NAV STATUS DED page, and the MMC
Kalman filter may be disabled altogether to utilize an INS-only solution on the NAV COMMANDS DED page.
NAV STATUS DED Page
The Navigation Status DED page is accessed by pressing the 4/STPT button on the ICP keypad when the LIST
DED page is displayed. This page displays the overall accuracy of the navigation system.


           1. System Accuracy                                                              5. Selected Steerpoint

              2. GPS Accuracy

            3. Mission Duration

             4. GPS Key Status



                                           Cycle to next steerpoint                   No function




                                                                        Return DED                      Cycle DED to NAV
                                                                        to CNI page                     COMMANDS page




                       Operate           Cycle to previous steerpoint                 No function



1.   System Accuracy. Displays the accuracy of the system navigation solution as estimated by the MMC
     Kalman filter, even if the filter mode is set to INS ONLY on the NAV COMMANDS DED page. Accuracy will
     not be displayed if a blended navigation solution is unavailable or the GPS receiver is powered off.
     •    HIGH. The system navigation accuracy is estimated to be <300 feet. A blended solution using GPS-
          aiding is required to achieve this level of accuracy.
     •    MED. The system navigation accuracy is estimated to be >300 feet but <6000 feet.
     •    LOW. The system navigation accuracy is estimated to be >6000 feet.
2.   GPS Accuracy. Displays an estimate of the GPS-solution accuracy. The status will not be displayed if the
     GPS receiver is not fully initialized or is powered off.
     •    HIGH. The onboard GPS receiver is tracking 4 GPS satellites. The estimated horizontal position error
          of the GPS-solution is <300 feet.
     •    LOW. The onboard GPS receiver is tracking less than 4 GPS satellites or the estimated horizontal
          position error of the GPS-solution is >300 feet.
     •    NO TRK. The onboard GPS receiver is not tracking any GPS satellites.
     NOTE: GPS will only be available if the DCS mission date is 28 March 1994 or later. In addition, GPS precision
     will be degraded unless “USA” is one of the countries assigned to the player’s coalition within the DCS
     mission. However, these limitations may be overridden if both of the following conditions are true:
     •    Unrestricted SATNAV is enabled in the player’s GAMEPLAY options or is enforced as enabled in the
          Mission Options for the mission being played.
     •    Unrestricted SATNAV is not enforced as disabled in the Mission Options for the mission being played.
3.   Mission Duration. Displays the number of consecutive days that valid GPS keys are required. (N/I)
4.   GPS Key Status. Displays the validity status of the cryptographic keys loaded within the GPS receiver.
5.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
NAV COMMANDS DED Page
The Navigation Commands DED page is accessed by pressing the 4/STPT button on the ICP keypad when the
LIST DED page is displayed, which displays the NAV STATUS DED page, followed by momentarily pressing the
DCS switch to the SEQ position. This page allows the pilot to inhibit GPS data from being used within the system
navigation solution or reset the GPS position data altogether, if necessary.


                                                                                             4. Selected Steerpoint

                  1. Filter Mode

                  2. Reset GPS

              3. Zeroize GPS                                                                 5. DED Asterisks



                                                                                     Move DED asterisks to
         Modify                           Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field




                                                                       Return DED                              Cycle DED to NAV
                                                                       to CNI page                               STATUS page




                          Operate       Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                     to the next data field


1.   Filter Mode. Displays the filter mode for deriving the system navigation solution. May be toggled between
     AUTO and INS ONLY by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while the DED asterisks are over the data field.
     •    AUTO. When GPS data is available, the MMC will utilize the Kalman filter to combine GPS and INS data
          to generate a blended navigation solution.
     •    INS ONLY. The system navigation solution will only utilize INS data, even if GPS data is available.
2.   Reset GPS. Resets the GPS receiver, which will restart the satellite acquisition and tracking process. May
     be commanded by placing the DED asterisks around the data field and pressing the 0/M-SEL button, which
     will highlight the text within the data field to confirm execution of the command.
3.   Zeroize GPS. Erases the enhanced precision cryptographic keys loaded into the GPS receiver. GPS-aiding
     will still be available, but the accuracy of the GPS data will be reduced. May be commanded by placing the
     DED asterisks around the data field and pressing the 0/M-SEL button, which will highlight the text within
     the data field to confirm execution of the command.
4.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
5.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
System Altitude (SALT)
As a multirole fighter capable of performing strikes against ground targets, a key aspect of the F-16’s Modular
Mission Computer (MMC) is accurately determining the aircraft altitude above mean sea level (MSL) when
performing weapon delivery calculations. Using the combined values of external air pressure, temperature, and
inertial acceleration, and aided by GPS signals and digital terrain data, the MMC generates a “system altitude
solution” to accurately display symbology within the HUD and HMCS, provide more precise indications of altitude
and vertical velocity, and determine appropriate elevation of sensors and aiming cursors.




                                                                              System Altitude (SALT)
                                                                                                       SALT above true altitude:
             System Altitude (SALT)




                                                                                                       - HUD/HMCS symbols displayed below target
                                                                                                       - Weapons impact short of target




                                      SALT below true altitude:
                                      - HUD/HMCS symbols displayed above target
                                      - Weapons impact beyond target

                                              Mean Sea Level (MSL)


                                                                        System Altitude (SALT)

The MMC system altitude is derived from one of three sources, in ascending order of priority:
•    CADC altitude, which utilizes raw pressure data from external air sensors.
•    INS-only altitude, which utilizes inertial data from accelerometers within the INS itself combined with CADC-
     derived altitude data.
•    Blended altitude, which utilizes the INS-only altitude combined with vertical position data received from
     either GPS satellites or from the Digital Terrain System (DTS).
If a blended altitude is not valid or enabled, the MMC will utilize the INS-only altitude as the system altitude. If
neither the blended altitude nor the INS-only altitude is valid or enabled, the MMC will utilize the CADC altitude
as the system altitude.
The Central Air Data Computer (CADC) provides atmospheric pressure and temperature data for computing true
airspeed and air density, which is then combined with vertical acceleration data derived from the Inertial
Navigation System (INS). Incorporating inertial acceleration generates a system altitude that is more responsive
to changes in vertical velocity and aircraft movement, overcoming the delays that are typically present in an
analog system relying solely on detecting changes in the external static air pressure around the aircraft.
If performing a Normal Gyrocompass Alignment of the INS, the INS-only altitude is initialized based on the CADC
altitude. Therefore, prior to initiating the INS alignment, it is important that the pilot ensures the Altimeter on the
Instrument Panel is set to ELEC operating mode by holding the mode switch to the ELEC position until the PNEU
flag is removed, and the Altimeter is calibrated to the airfield elevation by adjusting the barometric setting knob.
This ensures the INS-only altitude is accurately initialized to the aircraft altitude above mean sea level (MSL).
However, just as the INS-only navigation solution may accumulate errors over time, the INS-only altitude may
“drift”, leading to errors in the estimated altitude of the aircraft compared to its true altitude. The accuracy of the
system altitude may be automatically updated using data from GPS satellites or the onboard Digital Terrain
System (DTS); or, if necessary, the pilot may manually correct errors that have accumulated within the INS-only
altitude by performing an Altitude Calibration.
Automatic altitude calibration is enabled by setting the ACAL DED page to the AUTO sub-mode. When ACAL is
set to AUTO, the MMC will generate a “blended” system altitude using either GPS or DTS data to overcome
variations in atmospheric air pressure during the mission and accumulated errors within the INS-only altitude.
Unlike the blended navigation solution, which is generated by the MMC by applying GPS-derived corrections
through the Kalman filter when the delta between the INS-only and GPS-only solutions exceeds 300 feet, the
MMC generates the blended system altitude solution by applying GPS- or DTS-derived corrections continuously
without the Kalman filter. However, corrections are only applied when the vertical position accuracy of the GPS
and/or DTS are within the specified thresholds for the selected master mode, as specified below.
The AUTO ACAL DED page allows the pilot to select which source of data (GPS, DTS, or both) is used by the
MMC to generate the blended system altitude, provided the following criteria are met.
•    AUTO ACAL – GPS. The vertical position accuracy of the onboard GPS receiver must be within the
     thresholds for the corresponding master modes:
          o    A-G master mode: <50 feet.
          o    All other master modes: <100 feet.
•    AUTO ACAL – BOTH. The vertical position accuracy of the onboard GPS receiver and the DTS Terrain
     Referenced Navigation must be within the thresholds for the corresponding master modes:
          o    A-G master mode: <50 feet (GPS); <20 feet (DTS).
          o    All other master modes: <100 feet (GPS); <100 feet (DTS).
•    AUTO ACAL – DTS. The vertical position accuracy of the DTS Terrain Referenced Navigation must be within
     the thresholds for the corresponding master modes:
          o    A-G master mode: <20 feet.
          o    All other master modes: <100 feet.
When AUTO ACAL is set to BOTH, only one source of data may be used to generate the blended system altitude.
The MMC will automatically select the sensor that is providing the most accurate data, provided the vertical
position accuracy for the corresponding sensor(s) are within the appropriate thresholds.
If the blended system altitude cannot be generated, whether it be due to the GPS and/or DTS data exceeding
the corresponding thresholds or they have become invalid or unavailable, the system altitude will revert to the
INS-only altitude until valid GPS and/or DTS data is restored. If the INS-only altitude becomes invalid or
unavailable, whether that be due to the INS being powered off, not aligned, or the INS has malfunctioned or
failed in some manner, the system altitude will revert to CADC altitude.
Automatic altitude calibration may be disabled by setting the ACAL DED page to the MAN sub-mode. When ACAL
is set to MAN, the blended system altitude solution is disabled and the MMC system altitude will revert to the
INS-only altitude.
(See Navigation Update via Altitude Calibration for more information regarding manual altitude calibration.)
Digital Terrain System (DTS)
The Digital Terrain System is a software component of the F-16C’s onboard avionics that uses Digital Terrain
Elevation Data (DTED) stored within the aircraft memory to provide accurate navigation and altitude solutions
independently of other aircraft sensors such as the FCR or GPS. When DTED data is loaded into the onboard
memory through the Data Transfer Cartridge (DTC), DTS creates a Digital Flight Map (DFM) of the mission area,
representing a 3-dimensional terrain model that can be utilized for navigation and weapon delivery functions.
With regards to navigation, the DTS can utilize the radar altimeter to “track” the aircraft position over the DFM
using a function known as Terrain Referenced Navigation (TRN). By measuring the changes in terrain elevation
below the aircraft during flight, the TRN process generates a profile of the terrain below the aircraft and then
correlates that terrain profile with the 3-dimensional terrain model of the DFM. The TRN-estimated position and
altitude of the aircraft is then compared to the INS to determine if there are any errors. The TRN process is fully
automatic and does not require pilot input; however, the DTS requires an INS alignment for TRN to function.
In addition to valid INS data, TRN requires ground speeds between approximately 150 and 640 knots to reliably
function. If the INS is powered off, is not aligned, or has malfunctioned or failed in some manner, or if the ground
speed is outside usable thresholds, TRN will be disabled. The status and accuracy of TRN is continuously assessed
by the DTS software, which provides separate indications of the estimated horizontal and vertical accuracy of
TRN on the AUTO ACAL DED page. The accuracy of TRN is dependent on the factors specified below.
•    The accuracy and resolution of the DFM, which is dependent on accurate DTED data stored on the DTC.
•    The accuracy of the Combined Altitude Radar Altimeter (CARA), which is limited to 50,000 feet above the
     surface and pitch/roll attitudes of ±60° below 3000 feet. Above 3000 feet, the attitude limits may be less.
•    The characteristics of the terrain over which the aircraft is flying.
If the aircraft is flying over mountains or rolling hills with sufficient variations in elevation, TRN will generate a
terrain profile that can be accurately correlated to a unique location on the DFM, reducing the position uncertainty
of TRN (Shaded Area) and increasing the accuracy of any DTS-derived corrections to the blended system altitude.




                                                                                                1100 ft MSL
                                                                                                                           INS-only Altitude
                                                                                                                           True Aircraft Altitude

      520 ft AGL                         310 ft AGL           430 ft AGL          290 ft AGL              220 ft AGL


                                                                                                700 ft MSL                 INS-only Altitude
                                                                                                                           True Aircraft Altitude



       530 ft AGL                        460 ft AGL           480 ft AGL           520 ft AGL                 490 ft AGL


                                                                                                   TRN Position Uncertainty



                                                      DTS Terrain Referenced Navigation

If the aircraft is flying over relatively flat terrain with minimal variations in elevation, such as open plains, non-
mountainous deserts, large plateaus, basins, or bodies of water, TRN will be unable to generate a terrain profile
that can be correlated to a unique location on the DFM. Alternatively, if flying over extremely rugged terrain that
generates too much variation in the measurements supplied by the radar altimeter, TRN may be unable to
accurately correlate the terrain profile to any location on the DFM.
With regards to targeting and weapons delivery, if TRN is tracking the aircraft position on the DFM, DTS can be
used as passive ranging sensor to determine the elevation of the System-Point-of-Interest (SPI) independently
of other aircraft sensors such as FCR Air-to-Ground Ranging (AGR) or the TGP laser rangefinder/designator.


                                                                           DTS Passive Ranging (Dotted Line) determines
             System Altitude (SALT)




                                                                             elevation of System-Point-of-Interest (SPI)




                                      Mean Sea Level (MSL)


                                                             DTS Passive Ranging (PR)
AUTO ACAL DED Page
The Altitude Calibration DED page is accessed by pressing the 9/A-CAL button on the ICP keypad when the CNI
DED page is displayed. The AUTO ACAL DED page allows the pilot to select the sensor(s) that are used to
automatically correct vertical errors within the INS-only altitude and displays the status and overall accuracy of
the Digital Terrain System (DTS). When the AUTO ACAL sub-mode is selected, the MMC will utilize the Kalman
filter to combine GPS or DTS data with the INS-only altitude to generate a blended system altitude (SALT).
NOTE: The AUTO ACAL page is the default ACAL sub-mode. However, MAN ACAL sub-mode may be selected, if
necessary. If the MAN ACAL sub-mode is displayed, AUTO ACAL sub-mode may be selected by placing the DED
asterisks over the MAN data field and pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9.
(See MAN ACAL DED page for more information.)
                                      1. Altitude Sensor Option


                                                                                                          5. Selected Steerpoint
                  2. Filter Mode
                                                                                                          6. DED Asterisks
                3. GPS Accuracy
                                                                                                          7. TRN Horizontal Accuracy
         4. DTS TRN Mode Status
                                                                                                          8. TRN Vertical Accuracy


                                                                                                    Move DED asterisks to
             Modify                                      Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                                      Return DED                              Cycle to MAN
                                      Accept                                          to CNI page                              sub-mode




                            Operate                    Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                    to the next data field


1.   Altitude Sensor Option. Displays the sensor that is being used to generate the blended system altitude.
     May be cycled between GPS, BOTH, and DTS by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9. If the data field is not
     highlighted, the currently selected sensor is not available to generate the blended system altitude (e.g., if
     the GPS receiver is not powered or is not tracking any satellites, “GPS” won’t be highlighted)
     •     GPS. When GPS data is available, the MMC will combine GPS data with the INS-only altitude to generate
           a blended system altitude.
     •     BOTH. The MMC will combine GPS or DTS data with the INS-only altitude to generate a blended system
           altitude. The MMC will automatically select GPS or DTS data, based on the sensor that is providing the
           most accurate data.
     •     DTS. When DTS data is available and DTS TRN is in a Track mode, the MMC will combine DTS data
           with the INS-only altitude to generate a blended system altitude.
2.   Filter Mode. Displays the filter mode for deriving the system navigation solution. May be toggled between
     AUTO and INS ONLY on the NAV COMMANDS DED page.
     •     AUTO. When GPS data is available, the MMC will utilize the Kalman filter to combine GPS and INS data
           to generate a blended navigation solution.
     •     INS ONLY. The system navigation solution will only utilize INS data, even if GPS data is available.
3.   GPS Accuracy. Displays an overall estimate of the GPS-solution accuracy. The status will not be displayed
     if the GPS is not fully initialized or is powered off.
     •    HIGH. The onboard GPS receiver is tracking 4 GPS satellites. The estimated horizontal position error
          of the GPS-solution is <300 feet.
     •    LOW. The onboard GPS receiver is tracking less than 4 GPS satellites or the estimated horizontal
          position error of the GPS-solution is >300 feet.
     •    NO TRK. The onboard GPS receiver is not tracking any GPS satellites.
     NOTE: GPS will only be available if the DCS mission date is 28 March 1994 or later. In addition, GPS precision
     will be degraded unless “USA” is one of the countries assigned to the player’s coalition within the DCS
     mission. However, these limitations may be overridden if both of the following conditions are true:
     •    Unrestricted SATNAV is enabled in the player’s GAMEPLAY options or is enforced as enabled in the
          Mission Options for the mission being played.
     •    Unrestricted SATNAV is not enforced as disabled in the Mission Options for the mission being played.
4.   DTS TRN Mode Status. Displays the operating mode of the Terrain Referenced Navigation (TRN) function
     of the Digital Terrain System (DTS).
     •    ACQ. DTS TRN is in Acquisition mode. The DTS uses the INS navigation solution and the radar altimeter
          (CARA) to create a profile of the terrain below the aircraft. The terrain profile is compared to Digital
          Flight Map (DFM) stored within the onboard memory in an attempt to locate the aircraft’s position.
     •    TRK. DTS TRN is in Track mode. The DTS has successfully located the aircraft’s position over the
          Digital Flight Map (DFM) stored within the onboard memory.
5.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
7.   TRN Horizontal Accuracy. Displays an estimate of the horizontal position accuracy of the Terrain
     Referenced Navigation (TRN) function of the Digital Terrain System (DTS).
     •    High (H). The estimated horizontal position error of DTS is <395 feet.
     •    Medium (M). The estimated horizontal position error of DTS is 395-655 feet.
     •    Low (L). The estimated horizontal position error of DTS is >655 feet.
8.   TRN Vertical Accuracy. Displays an estimate of the vertical position accuracy of the Terrain Referenced
     Navigation (TRN) function of the Digital Terrain System (DTS).
     •    High (H). The estimated vertical position error of DTS is <21 feet.
     •    Medium (M). The estimated vertical position error of DTS is 21-40 feet.
     •    Low (L). The estimated vertical position error of DTS is >40 feet.
Navigation Updates
Although the onboard INS utilizes GPS-aiding to maintain navigation accuracy throughout the mission, the F-16C
retains the ability to accept manual updates to the INS-only solution in the event the blended solution becomes
invalid, or GPS signals are unavailable or unreliable. Under these circumstances, the F-16C will be solely reliant
on the INS and may need to periodically obtain a position “fix” to correct horizontal errors within the INS-only
solution or perform an altitude calibration to correct vertical errors within the INS-only solution.
Several methods may be used while in flight to update an aircraft’s position to mitigate accumulated errors within
the INS which is especially crucial for long-distance or long-duration flights. These methods may include simply
overflying a recognizable landmark (such as rail line crossing a paved road along the planned flight route), of
which the precise coordinates are known, and timing the position update as the aircraft passes over the location.




                                                   N 35° 17.914’
                                                  E 036° 47.162’



                                  Navigation update by direct overflight

Other methods may utilize the onboard sensors such as the fire control radar (FCR) to locate and range known
landmarks to obtain the aircraft’s relative position from the landmark in lieu of performing a direct overflight.



                                                     FCR Antenna
                                                   Azimuth/Elevation

                                                                                       N 35° 44.345’
                                                                                      E 037° 06.829’




                                     Navigation update by sensor track

However, if it is not feasible to perform a navigation update, which may be the case just prior to arriving over
the intended target or if performing low-level flight in an area devoid of any useable landmarks, or if a small
aiming correction is required to ensure weapon release calculations are accurate, a temporary correction may be
applied by “slewing” the Navigation cursor. In this case, the INS-only solution is not updated, but navigation
steering and weapon release calculations are adjusted to account for small inaccuracies in the system navigation
solution. The difference between performing a cursor slew correction compared to performing an actual update
to the navigation system by fix-taking is described on the following pages.
If the SYS ACCUR data field is displayed as HIGH on the NAV STATUS DED page, position fix-taking and altitude
calibrations are not necessary since the accuracy of the system navigation solution already exceeds the precision
that can normally be obtained from a manual update to the INS. When utilizing the Kalman filter to generate a
blended navigation solution, the MMC will continuously apply corrections derived from GPS data to improve
system navigation accuracy if the delta between the INS-only solution and the GPS-only solution exceeds 300
feet (91 meters). If the INS-only solution is updated by performing a position fix or altitude calibration in a
manner that incurs a delta of 300 feet or more from the GPS-only solution, the MMC Kalman filter algorithm will
gradually remove the update over a period of time until the SYS ACCUR status is returned to HIGH.
GPS-aiding will typically ensure a system navigation solution with less than 300 feet of error; however, slight
misalignments in the HUD/HMCS symbology or sensor aiming precision may be noticeable. Although errors up to
300 feet may still occur, these are typically rare and intermittent as the MMC Kalman filter continuously refines
and updates the blended navigation solution during the mission.
Navigation Correction via Cursor Slew
In the figure below on the left, the aircraft is proceeding along the planned navigation route and appears to be
on course. However, while approaching the next steerpoint, the pilot visually observes the Diamond symbol that
marks the steerpoint location is offset from the physical landmark that corresponds with the true steerpoint
location, in this case a rail line crossing a paved road. The INS solution estimates that the aircraft is located along
the intended navigation route, but sufficient errors have accumulated within the INS to the extent the aircraft
has drifted noticeably off course.
In the figure below in the center, pilot sets the FCR to Ground Map (GM) mode, assigns the FCR MFD format as
the Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI), and uses the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip to slew the
Navigation cursor until the Diamond symbol is aligned with the railroad crossing. To verify the railroad crossing
is the correct landmark, which should be near a small lake that has been planned as an offset aimpoint, the pilot
cycles the sighting point to OA1, and an Offset Aimpoint triangle symbol appears aligned over the small lake
nearby, thus confirming the Diamond symbol is aligned to the correct location.




                     True Nav      HSD Nav
                      Route         Route


                                                                                     INS Aircraft
                                                                                       Position     True Aircraft
                                                                                                      Position




    INS Aircraft                                INS Aircraft
                   True Aircraft                               True Aircraft
      Position                                    Position
                     Position                                    Position

                                             Navigation Cursor Corrections

In the figure above on the right, the pilot proceeds on course to the next steerpoint without performing an update
to the navigation solution. Since the navigation solution was not updated, the INS estimates that the aircraft is
now off course, which will appear as a deviation from the navigation route on the HSD MFD format. However,
despite the indicated course deviation, the manual correction that has been applied to the symbology by slewing
the Navigation cursor accounts for the drift of the INS navigation solution, thus ensuring the Diamond symbol is
aligned with the true location of the next steerpoint, which corresponds with a factory building.
Applying a cursor correction also affects the calculated trajectory and weapon release points for the selected
munition if a “pre-planned” weapon delivery sub-mode is being employed. If the factory was the intended target,
the manual correction applied by the cursor slew would provide accurate steering symbology and weapon release
cues to the true location of the target. As before, if an offset aimpoint has been planned for the selected
steerpoint, the pilot may cycle the sighting point to OA1 or OA2 as necessary to confirm the Offset Aimpoint
symbol is properly aligned with the corresponding physical landmark that is visually identified through the HUD
or HMCS. (See Sighting Points and Cursor Slews in the Tactical Employment chapter for more information.)
However, the pilot may remove the accumulated cursor slews that have been applied to the Navigation cursor
using the Cursor Zero (CZ) function, restoring the symbology to the current INS navigation solution, if necessary.
Navigation Update via Position Fix
In the figure below on the left, the aircraft is proceeding along the planned navigation route and appears to be
on course. However, while approaching the next steerpoint, the pilot visually observes the Diamond symbol that
marks the steerpoint location is offset from the physical landmark that corresponds with the true steerpoint
location, in this case a rail line crossing a paved road. The INS solution estimates that the aircraft is located along
the intended navigation route, but sufficient errors have accumulated within the INS to the extent the aircraft
has drifted noticeably off course.
In the figure below in the center, the pilot presses the 8/FIX button on the ICP keypad when the CNI page is
displayed on the DED in preparation for performing a position fix and sets the sensor option on the FIX DED page
to “HUD”. The pilot uses the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip to slew the Navigation cursor until
the Diamond symbol within the HUD is aligned with the railroad crossing.
NOTE: Offset aimpoints cannot be selected when performing a position fix or altitude calibration, but are shown
in the figure below to illustrate how their alignment would be affected by a navigation solution update.




                        True Nav      HSD Nav
                         Route         Route



                                                                                                    INS Aircraft
                                                                                                      Position




       INS Aircraft                              INS Aircraft
                      True Aircraft                             True Aircraft
         Position                                  Position
                        Position                                  Position

                                                Navigation Solution Update

In the figure above on the right, the pilot accepts the position fix by pressing the ENTR button on the ICP keypad,
which applies the cursor delta to the INS navigation solution, and then proceeds on course to the next steerpoint.
Since the navigation solution is now updated to correct the position error that had accumulated within the INS,
the INS solution now accurately reflects the true position of the aircraft. The INS will now indicate the aircraft is
on course toward the selected steerpoint with no deviation from the navigation route on the HSD MFD format,
and the Diamond symbol is aligned with the true location of the next steerpoint, which corresponds with a factory
building.
Alternatively, the pilot may elect to use the “OFLY” option to update the navigation solution by directly overflying
the rail line crossing. When given adequate line-of-sight and a radar-reflective object to identify on the fire control
radar (FCR) in Ground Map (GM) mode, the pilot may elect to use the FCR to update the navigation solution; or
the targeting pod may be used to identify a landmark from high altitude when updating the navigation solution.
Navigation Update via Altitude Calibration
If a blended system altitude cannot be generated from GPS or DTS data, or if the ACAL DED page is set to MAN
sub-mode, the MMC system altitude will revert to the INS-only altitude. Under these circumstances, it may be
necessary to update the system altitude during the mission by performing an altitude calibration to manually
correct errors that have accumulated within the INS-only altitude. Several methods may be used while in flight
to update the INS-only altitude, which include simply overflying a steerpoint, of which the precise elevation is
known, and using the radar altimeter to perform an altitude calibration as the aircraft passes overhead. Other
methods may utilize onboard sensors such as the fire control radar (FCR) or targeting pod (TGP) to locate and
range known landmarks to obtain the aircraft’s altitude relative to the landmark’s elevation in lieu of performing
a direct overflight.
In the figure below on the left, the pilot presses the 9/A-CAL button on the ICP keypad when the CNI page is
displayed on the DED in preparation for performing a manual altitude calibration and sets the sensor option on
the MAN ACAL DED page to “RALT”. The pilot maneuvers the aircraft to directly overfly the steerpoint, and
presses TMS Forward when the aircraft is directly overhead the steerpoint location to freeze the altitude delta as
measured by the radar altimeter.
When directly overhead the steerpoint, the INS-only altitude was 2,296 feet above mean sea level (MSL), which
would equate to 1,960 feet above ground level (AGL), assuming the steerpoint elevation was accurate. However,
the radar altimeter measurement of the aircraft altitude was 2,032 feet AGL, which produced a delta of 72 feet.
When the pilot presses the ENTR button on the ICP keypad, the delta of 72 feet is used to update the INS-only
altitude to 2,368 feet MSL, reflecting the true aircraft altitude above mean sea level.
                                                                                                               INS-only Altitude:
                                                                                                                  3,627 feet

                                                                                                                         Altitude Δ: -84 feet
                                                                                                               Aircraft Altitude:
                                                                                      System Altitude (SALT)



                                                                                                                  3,543 feet
                Aircraft Altitude:
                   2,368 feet

  Altitude Δ: 72 feet
               INS-only Altitude:
                                     System Altitude (SALT)




                  2,296 feet




                                                                                                                                          Steerpoint Elevation:
                                                                                                                                               1,148 feet


                                                              Steerpoint Elevation:
                                                                    336 feet
  Mean Sea Level (MSL)


                                                                       Manual Altitude Calibration

In the figure above on the right, the pilot presses the 9/A-CAL button on the ICP keypad when the CNI page is
displayed on the DED in preparation for performing a manual altitude calibration and sets the sensor option on
the MAN ACAL DED page to “FCR”. The pilot then sets the FCR to Ground Map (GM) mode, assigns the FCR MFD
format as the Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI), uses the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip to slew the
Navigation cursor until the FCR crosshairs on the FCR MFD format are directly over the radar-reflective object at
the steerpoint location, and presses TMS Forward to enter Fixed Target Track (FTT) and freeze the altitude delta
as measured by the FCR.
When the FCR entered FTT and the altitude delta was frozen, the INS-only altitude was 3,627 feet MSL, which
would equate to 2,476 feet AGL, assuming the steerpoint elevation was accurate. However, based on the FCR
track and associated calculations, the aircraft altitude was 2,395 feet AGL, which produced a delta of -84 feet.
When the pilot presses the ENTR button on the ICP keypad, the delta of -84 feet is used to update the INS-only
altitude to 3,543 feet MSL, reflecting the true aircraft altitude above sea level.
FIX DED Page
The Fix DED page is accessed by pressing the 8/FIX button on the ICP keypad when the CNI page is displayed
on the DED. This page allows the pilot to correct horizontal errors within the INS-only navigation solution using
one of several methods. The page may only be accessed when the master mode is set to NAV.
                                           1. Fix-taking Sensor Option



             2. Selected Steerpoint                                                                            6. DED Asterisks

                     3. Position Delta

                4. System Accuracy

                     5. GPS Accuracy


                                                                                                    Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                                       Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                                      Return DED                              Cycle to next
                                      Accept                                          to CNI page                             Sensor Option

                                  Select

                            Operate                    Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                    to the next data field


1.   Fix-taking Sensor Option. Displays the sensor that will be used to obtain a position fix of the selected
     steerpoint location. The next available option may be selected by momentarily positioning the DCS (“Dobber”
     switch) to the SEQ position. If the data field is not highlighted, the selected sensor is not available to obtain
     a position fix (e.g., if a targeting pod is not installed and powered, “TGP” won’t be highlighted).
     •    HUD. The HUD Diamond symbol may be slewed to the selected steerpoint location to obtain a position
          fix. (See Performing a Position Fix using HUD for more information.)
     •    FCR. The fire control radar will be used to obtain a position fix on the selected steerpoint location when
          set to Ground Map (GM), Ground Moving Target (GMT), or Sea (SEA) modes on the FCR MFD format.
          (See Performing a Position Fix using FCR for more information.)
     •    TGP. The targeting pod will be used to obtain a position fix on the selected steerpoint location when
          set to Air-to-Ground (A-G) mode on the TGP MFD format. (See Performing a Position Fix using TGP for
          more information.)
          NOTE: Although it is not required to fire the TGP’s laser rangefinder/designator when performing a
          position fix, it will increase the accuracy of the delta, particularly when at low altitude and/or shallow
          look-down angles.
     •    OFLY. The aircraft position itself will be used to obtain a position fix using a direct overflight of the
          selected steerpoint location. (See Performing a Position Fix using OFLY for more information.)
2.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint that is being used as a reference location for
     obtaining a position fix. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint.
     The selected steerpoint can also be changed by placing the DED asterisks over the data field and input the
     steerpoint number using the ICP keypad and then pressing ENTR.
3.   Position Delta. Displays the difference, or “delta”, between the current INS-only navigation solution,
     referenced to the selected steerpoint location, and the selected fix-taking sensor, in nautical miles (NM). For
     reference, 0.05 NM = 300 feet (91 meters).
4.   System Accuracy. Displays an overall estimate of the system navigation accuracy, which will be derived
     from either a blended solution or an INS-only solution, depending on the filter mode setting on the NAV
     COMMANDS DED page. The status will not be displayed if a system navigation solution is unavailable.
     •    HIGH. The system navigation accuracy is estimated to be <300 feet. A blended solution using GPS-
          aiding is required to achieve this level of accuracy. A position fix is neither required nor recommended.
     •    MED. The system navigation accuracy is estimated to be >300 feet but <6000 feet. A position fix may
          be performed if feasible to improve system accuracy.
     •    LOW. The system navigation accuracy is estimated to be >6000 feet. A position fix should be
          performed when able to improve system accuracy.
5.   GPS Accuracy. Displays an overall estimate of the GPS-solution accuracy. The status will not be displayed
     if the GPS is not fully initialized or is powered off.
     •    HIGH. The onboard GPS receiver is tracking 4 GPS satellites. The estimated horizontal position error
          of the GPS-solution is <300 feet.
     •    LOW. The onboard GPS receiver is tracking less than 4 GPS satellites or the estimated horizontal
          position error of the GPS-solution is >300 feet.
     •    NO TRK. The onboard GPS receiver is not tracking any GPS satellites.
     NOTE: GPS will only be available if the DCS mission date is 28 March 1994 or later. In addition, GPS precision
     will be degraded unless “USA” is one of the countries assigned to the player’s coalition within the DCS
     mission. However, these limitations may be overridden if both of the following conditions are true:
     •    Unrestricted SATNAV is enabled in the player’s GAMEPLAY options or is enforced as enabled in the
          Mission Options for the mission being played.
     •    Unrestricted SATNAV is not enforced as disabled in the Mission Options for the mission being played.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Performing a Position Fix using HUD
The Diamond symbol may be slewed within the HUD field-of-view to obtain a position fix of the selected steerpoint
location when the “HUD” sensor option is selected on the FIX DED page.
NOTE: If the HUD Diamond symbol is being used to perform a position fix, accuracy will be hindered when
performed at low-altitudes or under conditions in which the selected steerpoint location is closer to the horizon,
due to the linear perspective. Steeper look-down angles will provide better conditions to adequately ascertain
whether the Diamond symbol is properly aligned over the selected steerpoint location.
To perform a position fix using the HUD Diamond
                                                             3. DMS Forward-Short is                  Landmark at
symbol, perform the following:                              pressed to set HUD as SOI              steerpoint location
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select HUD in the
     sensor option data field.
3.   DMS Forward-Short – Press to select the HUD as
     SOI.
4.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew                                                 2. HUD sensor option
     the Diamond symbol to the correct location within
     the HUD field-of-view that corresponds with the
     selected steerpoint.
5.   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the position delta
     and update the INS position.
     NOTE: The DED asterisks must be placed around
                                                                                        4. Diamond symbol is slewed
     the sensor option data field to accept the delta.
                                                                                        to correct steerpoint location
Performing a Position Fix using FCR
The FCR may be used to obtain a position fix of the selected steerpoint location when set to Ground Map (GM),
Ground Moving Target (GMT), or Sea (SEA) modes on the FCR MFD format, in Fixed Target Track (FTT) or Moving
Target Track (MTT), and the “FCR” sensor option is selected on the FIX DED page.
To perform a position fix using the FCR, perform the
following:                                                     3. DMS Aft-Short is                 4. FCR crosshairs are
                                                            pressed to set FCR as SOI           slewed to desired location
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select FCR in the sensor
     option data field.
3.   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the
     FCR as SOI on the applicable MFD.
4.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the
     FCR crosshairs to the correct location that
     corresponds with the selected steerpoint.
5.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the
     FCR to Fixed Target Track (FTT).
6.   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the position delta
     and update the INS position.
     NOTE: The DED asterisks must be placed around
     the sensor option data field to accept the delta.

                                                            5. TMS Forward-Short is pressed
                                                            to enter Fixed Target Track (FTT)




                                                          2. FCR sensor option
Performing a Position Fix using TGP
The TGP may be used to obtain a position fix of the selected steerpoint location when set to Air-to-Ground (A-G)
mode on the TGP MFD format, in POINT track, and the “TGP” sensor option is selected on the FIX DED page.
To perform a position fix using the TGP, perform the
                                                                 3. DMS Aft-Short is           4. TGP crosshairs are
following:                                                    pressed to set TGP as SOI     slewed to desired location

1.   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select TGP in the sensor
     option data field.
3.   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the
     TGP as SOI on the applicable MFD.
4.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the
     TGP line-of-sight crosshairs to the correct location
     that corresponds with the selected steerpoint.
5.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the
     TGP to POINT track.
6.   (Optional) LASER ARM Switch (MISC panel) – Set
     to LASER ARM position, if necessary.
7.   (Optional) Trigger (Stick) – Pull and hold to gain
     accurate range data.
     NOTE: Although it is not required to fire the TGP’s       5. TMS Forward-Short is
     laser rangefinder/designator, it will increase the      pressed to enter POINT track
     accuracy of the delta, particularly when at low
     altitude and/or shallow look-down angles.
8.   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the position delta
     and update the INS position.
     NOTE: The DED asterisks must be placed around
     the sensor option data field to accept the delta.
9.   Trigger (Stick) – Release.




                                                            2. TGP sensor option
Performing a Position Fix using OFLY
A position fix may be obtained by directly overflying the selected steerpoint location when the “OFLY” sensor
option is selected on the FIX DED page. However, it is worth noting that a direct overflight is the least accurate
method of obtaining a position fix, particularly at higher speeds and/or altitudes, due to needing to freeze the
position delta precisely as the aircraft passes over the selected steerpoint location.
NOTE: If OFLY is displayed in the sensor option data field on the FIX DED page, TMS Forward-Short will designate
the aircraft position as the selected steerpoint location regardless of the selected SOI.
To perform a position fix using a direct overflight of
the selected steerpoint location, perform the following:                                            Landmark at
                                                                                                 steerpoint location
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select OFLY in the
     sensor option data field.
3.   Maneuver the aircraft as necessary to ensure the
     flight path will take it over location that
     corresponds with the selected steerpoint.
                                                                                             2. OFLY sensor option
4.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to freeze the
     position delta when directly overhead the correct
     location that corresponds with the selected
     steerpoint.
5.   (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to
     reject the frozen position delta, return to step 3,
     and attempt another overflight, if necessary.
6.   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the position delta
     and update the INS position.
     NOTE: The DED asterisks must be placed around
     the sensor option data field to accept the delta.


                                                                                                 4. TMS Forward-
                                                                                                Short is pressed to
                                                                                               freeze position delta
MAN ACAL DED Page
The Altitude Calibration DED page is accessed by pressing the 9/A-CAL button on the ICP keypad when the CNI
DED page is displayed. The MAN ACAL DED page allows the pilot to manually correct vertical errors within the
INS-only altitude using one of several methods. When the MAN ACAL sub-mode is selected, the MMC blended
system altitude is disabled and the INS-only altitude will be utilized as system altitude, even if GPS or DTS data
is available. If necessary, the pilot may also selectively or simultaneously correct horizontal errors within the INS-
only navigation solution from the MAN ACAL DED page in lieu of performing a position fix from the FIX DED page.
NOTE: The AUTO ACAL page is the default ACAL sub-mode. However, MAN ACAL sub-mode may be selected, if
necessary. If the AUTO ACAL sub-mode is displayed, MAN ACAL sub-mode may be selected by momentarily
pressing the DCS switch to the SEQ position.
(See AUTO ACAL DED page for more information.)
                              1. Altitude Sensor Option                                  2. Update Type



            3. Manual Calibration                                                                          7. Selected Steerpoint

           4. Reference Elevation                                                                          8. DED Asterisks

                 5. Altitude Delta

                 6. Position Delta


                                                                                                   Move DED asterisks to
             Modify                                       Cycle to next steerpoint                 the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                                     Return DED                               Cycle to next
                                      Accept                                                                                  Update Type
                                                                                     to CNI page




                            Operate                  Cycle to previous steerpoint                   Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                   to the next data field


1.   Altitude Sensor Option. Displays the sensor that will be used to perform a calibration of the INS-only
     altitude. The next available option may be selected by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while the DED
     asterisks are over the data field. If the data field is not highlighted, the selected sensor is not available to
     perform a calibration (e.g., if a targeting pod is not installed and powered, “TGP” won’t be highlighted).
     •    RALT. The Combined Altitude Radar Altimeter (CARA) will be used to calibrate the INS-only altitude
          using a direct overflight of the selected steerpoint location. (See Performing an Altitude Calibration
          using RALT for more information.)
     •    FCR. The fire control radar will be used to calibrate the INS-only altitude using the selected steerpoint
          location when set to Ground Map (GM), Ground Moving Target (GMT), or Sea (SEA) modes on the FCR
          MFD format. (See Performing an Altitude Calibration using FCR for more information.)
          NOTE: An altitude calibration using the FCR is limited to a slant range of 10 NM (F010.0) or less. If
          the slant range exceeds 10 NM, the altitude calibration can still be performed, but the altitude delta
          will remain at 0 after entering Fixed Target Track regardless of whether an altitude delta actually exists.
     •    HUD. The HUD Diamond symbol may be slewed to the selected steerpoint location to calibrate the
          INS-only altitude. (See Performing an Altitude Calibration using HUD for more information.)
     •    TGP. The targeting pod will be used to calibrate the INS-only altitude using the selected steerpoint
          location when set to Air-to-Ground (A-G) mode on the TGP MFD format. (See Performing an Altitude
          Calibration using TGP for more information.)
2.   Update Type Option. Displays which INS solution(s) will be updated when a manual altitude calibration is
     performed. The next available option may be selected by momentarily positioning the DCS (“Dobber” switch)
     to the SEQ position.
     •    ALT. The INS-only altitude will be updated. The INS-only navigation solution will not be updated.
     •    BOTH. The INS-only altitude and INS-only navigation solution will be updated.
     •    POS. The INS-only navigation solution will be updated. The INS-only altitude will not be updated.
3.   Manual Calibration. Indicates the altitude calibration of the system altitude (SALT) is set to Manual sub-
     mode. Automatic sub-mode may be selected to by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while the DED
     asterisks are over the data field.
4.   Reference Elevation. Displays the reference elevation for the selected steerpoint, in feet (FT). The
     reference elevation used for altitude calibration may be momentarily modified by placing the DED asterisks
     over the data field and inputting the steerpoint elevation using the ICP keypad and then pressing ENTR.
     NOTE: Modifying the reference elevation on the MAN ACAL DED page does not change the elevation of the
     selected steerpoint. If the selected steerpoint is changed, the modified reference elevation entered on the
     MAN ACAL DED page for the previous steerpoint will be erased.
5.   Altitude Delta. Displays the difference, or “delta”, between the current INS-only altitude, referenced to
     the selected steerpoint elevation, and the selected altitude calibration sensor, in feet (FT).
6.   Position Delta. Displays the difference, or “delta”, between the current INS-only navigation solution,
     referenced to the selected steerpoint location, and the selected altitude calibration sensor, in nautical miles
     (NM). For reference, 0.05 NM = 300 feet (91 meters).
7.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
8.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Performing an Altitude Calibration using RALT
The INS-only altitude may be updated using the Combined Altitude Radar Altimeter (CARA) by directly overflying
the selected steerpoint location when the “RALT” sensor option is selected on the MAN ACAL DED page. However,
it is worth noting that a direct overflight is the least accurate method of performing an altitude calibration,
particularly at higher speeds and/or altitudes, due to needing to freeze the altitude and/or position delta(s)
precisely as the aircraft passes over the selected steerpoint location.
NOTE: If RALT is displayed in the sensor option data field on the MAN ACAL DED page, TMS Forward-Short will
freeze the altitude and/or position delta(s) regardless of the selected SOI.
To perform a manual altitude calibration using a direct
                                                                                                         Landmark at
overflight of the selected steerpoint location, perform                                               steerpoint location
the following:
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 9/A-CAL.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to switch the ACAL DED
     page to MAN sub-mode, if necessary.
3.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the type of
     update to be performed.
                                                                                                          3. Update type
     •    INS-only altitude – ALT.
     •    INS-only altitude and position – BOTH.                           4. RALT sensor option

     •    INS-only position – POS.
4.   ICP Keypad – Press any button 1-9 to select
     RALT in the sensor option data field.
5.   Maneuver the aircraft as necessary to ensure the
     flight path will take it over location that
     corresponds with the selected steerpoint.
6.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to freeze the
     altitude and/or position delta(s) when directly
     overhead the correct location that corresponds
     with the selected steerpoint.
7.   (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to
     reject the frozen altitude and/or position delta(s),
     return to step 5, and attempt another overflight
     if necessary.                                              6. TMS Forward-Short is pressed
                                                               to freeze altitude/position delta(s)
8.   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the altitude and/or
     position delta(s) and update the INS-only altitude
     and/or INS-only position.
     NOTE: The DED asterisks must be placed around
     the sensor option data field to accept the delta(s).
Performing an Altitude Calibration using FCR
The FCR may be used to update the INS-only altitude using the selected steerpoint location when set to Ground
Map (GM), Ground Moving Target (GMT), or Sea (SEA) modes on the FCR MFD format, in Fixed Target Track
(FTT) or Moving Target Track (MTT), and the “FCR” sensor option is selected on the MAN ACAL DED page.
To perform a manual altitude calibration using the FCR,
perform the following:                                            5. DMS Aft-Short is                  6. FCR crosshairs are
                                                               pressed to set FCR as SOI            slewed to desired location
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 9/A-CAL.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to switch the ACAL DED
     page to MAN sub-mode, if necessary.
3.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the type of update
     to be performed.
     •    INS-only altitude – ALT.
     •    INS-only altitude and position – BOTH.
     •    INS-only position – POS.
4.   ICP Keypad – Press any button 1-9 to select FCR in
     the sensor option data field.
5.   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the
     FCR as SOI on the applicable MFD.
6.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the
     FCR crosshairs to the correct location that
                                                                7. TMS Forward-Short is pressed
     corresponds with the selected steerpoint.                  to enter Fixed Target Track (FTT)
7.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the
     FCR to Fixed Target Track (FTT).
     NOTE: An altitude calibration using the FCR is
     limited to a slant range of 10 nautical miles (F010.0)
     or less. If the slant range exceeds 10 NM, the
     altitude calibration can still be performed, but the
     altitude delta will remain at 0 after entering Fixed
     Target Track regardless of whether an altitude delta
     actually exists.
8.   (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject
     Fixed Target Track, return to step 6, and adjust the
     FCR crosshairs if necessary.
9.   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the altitude and/or
     position delta and update the INS-only altitude
     and/or INS-only position.
     NOTE: The DED asterisks must be placed around
     the sensor option data field to accept the delta(s).




                                                              4. FCR sensor option             3. Update type
Performing an Altitude Calibration using HUD
The Diamond symbol may be slewed within the HUD field-of-view to update the INS-only altitude of the selected
steerpoint location when the “HUD” sensor option is selected on the MAN ACAL DED page.
NOTE: If the HUD Diamond symbol is being used to perform an altitude calibration, accuracy will be hindered
when performed at low-altitudes or under conditions in which the selected steerpoint location is closer to the
horizon, due to the linear perspective. Steeper look-down angles will provide better conditions to adequately
ascertain whether the Diamond symbol is properly aligned over the selected steerpoint location.
To perform a manual altitude calibration using the
                                                             5. DMS Forward-Short is                            Landmark at
HUD Diamond symbol, perform the following:                  pressed to set HUD as SOI                        steerpoint location

1.   ICP Keypad – Press 9/A-CAL.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to switch the ACAL DED
     page to MAN sub-mode, if necessary.
3.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the type of
     update to be performed.
     •    INS-only altitude – ALT.
                                                                                                                3. Update type
     •    INS-only altitude and position – BOTH.
                                                                               4. HUD sensor option
     •    INS-only position – POS.
4.   ICP Keypad – Press any button 1-9 to select HUD
     in the sensor option data field.
5.   DMS Forward-Short – Press to select the HUD as                                              6. Diamond symbol is slewed
     SOI.                                                                                        to correct steerpoint location

6.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew
     the Diamond symbol to the correct location within
     the HUD field-of-view that corresponds with the
     selected steerpoint.
7.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to freeze the
     altitude and/or position delta(s).
8.   (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to
     reject the frozen altitude and/or position delta(s),
     return to step 6, and adjust the Diamond symbol
                                                                   7. TMS Forward-Short is pressed
     if necessary.                                                to freeze altitude/position delta(s)

9.   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the altitude and/or
     position delta(s) and update the INS-only altitude
     and/or INS-only position.
     NOTE: The DED asterisks must be placed around
     the sensor option data field to accept the
     delta(s).
Performing an Altitude Calibration using TGP
The TGP may be used to update the INS-only altitude using the selected steerpoint location when set to Air-to-
Ground (A-G) mode on the TGP MFD format, in POINT track, and the “TGP” sensor option is selected on the MAN
ACAL DED page.
To perform a manual altitude calibration using the TGP,
                                                                5. DMS Aft-Short is              6. TGP crosshairs are
perform the following:                                       pressed to set TGP as SOI        slewed to desired location

1.   ICP Keypad – Press 9/A-CAL.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to switch the ACAL DED
     page to MAN sub-mode, if necessary.
3.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the type of update
     to be performed.
     •    INS-only altitude – ALT.
     •    INS-only altitude and position – BOTH.
     •    INS-only position – POS.
4.   ICP Keypad – Press any button 1-9 to select TGP
     in the sensor option data field.
5.   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the
     TGP as SOI on the applicable MFD.
6.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the
     TGP line-of-sight crosshairs to the correct location
                                                               7. TMS Forward-Short is
     that corresponds with the selected steerpoint.          pressed to enter POINT track

7.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the
     TGP to POINT track.
8.   (Optional) LASER ARM Switch (MISC panel) – Set
     to LASER ARM position, if necessary.
9.   (Optional) Trigger (Stick) – Pull and hold to gain
     accurate range data.
     NOTE: Although it is not required to fire the TGP’s
     laser rangefinder/designator, it will increase the
     accuracy of the delta(s), particularly when at low
     altitude and/or shallow look-down angles.
10. TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to freeze the
    altitude and/or position delta(s).
11. Trigger (Stick) – Release.
12. (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject
    POINT track, return to step 6, and adjust the TGP
    line-of-sight crosshairs if necessary.
13. ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the altitude and/or
    position delta(s) and update the INS-only altitude
    and/or INS-only position.
     NOTE: The DED asterisks must be placed around
     the sensor option data field to accept the delta(s).   4. TGP sensor option            5. Update type
NAVIGATION DATABASE
The F-16C’s navigation database consists of 127 unique steerpoints, many of which may be uploaded from a
removable Data Transfer Cartridge (DTC) prior to a mission. These steerpoints serve as geographical coordinates
for navigation and routing, displaying geographic lines or reference points used for maintaining situational
awareness, plotting known or suspected locations of hostile air defenses, and storing markpoints or ground target
locations received from other aircraft over the datalink.




Steerpoints within the navigation database are stored in one of seven partitions, depending on their type. Most
steerpoints are uploaded from the DTC, but some types may be added or edited from within the cockpit as well.

                                  Geographic      Pre-planned
      Navigation    Markpoints      Lines           Threats Datalink Destinations          Extended Datalink



                                            Steerpoint Partitions

•    Navigation partition. Navigation steerpoints/routes and steerpoints input using MGRS coordinates.
•    Markpoints partition. Markpoints stored using ownship sensors or direct overflight of locations of interest.
•    Geographic Lines partition. Geographic lines for depicting areas of the battlefield or airspace boundaries.
•    Pre-planned Threats partition. Hostile air defense locations that need to be avoided or used as targets
     for pre-planned HARM engagements, along with corresponding threat engagement rings.
•    Datalink partition. Markpoints or SPI locations transmitted from other flight members.
•    Destinations partition. Airbases, divert airfields, or other reference points used for orientation.
•    Extended Datalink partition. SEAD targets transmitted from other flight members or ground/surface
     surveillance tracks transmitted from AWACS.
Steerpoints
All steerpoints include four elements of information, which are the index number of the steerpoint within the
database, the latitude coordinates of the steerpoint, the longitude coordinates of the steerpoint, and the
steerpoint elevation above sea level. Depending on the database partition within which the steerpoint resides,
additional elements of information may be included with the steerpoint, such as a desired Time Over Steerpoint
(TOS), whether the steerpoint is part of a navigation route or part of a geographic line, if the steerpoint marks
the location of an air defense threat, etc.


Steerpoint Symbols
Steerpoint locations are primarily displayed using symbols on the HSD and HAD MFD formats. However, the HUD,
HMCS, and the FCR MFD format may also display symbols representing the steerpoint currently selected for
navigation, of which the type of symbol will vary depending on the selected master modes and/or sub-modes.
(See Navigation by Steerpoints for more information.)
Navigation Steerpoint
Steerpoints 1-25 are intended to be used for primary navigation. As such, Navigation Routes may only consist of
steerpoints within this range. (NOTE: Navigation Routes 2 and 3 are not implemented in DCS: F-16C.)
        Steerpoint. Any steerpoint that is not selected for navigation steering will be displayed as a hollow white
        circle symbol on the HSD and HAD MFD formats.
             Selected Steerpoint. The steerpoint that is currently selected for navigation steering will be
             displayed as a solid white circle symbol on the HSD and HAD MFD formats and as a white “wedding
             cake” symbol on the FCR MFD format when the FCR is set to CRM mode.
The selected steerpoint is represented by either a Steerpoint Diamond or a Target Designator Box within the HUD
and HMCS symbology. (See Sighting Points within the Tactical Employment chapter for more information.)
Ownship Markpoint
Steerpoints 26-30 are used for storing ownship markpoints. Markpoints are steerpoints that may be stored during
the mission for the purposes of navigation at some point later in the mission, recording a location of interest
during reconnaissance, or for follow-on targeting of sensors and/or weapons.
        Ownship Markpoint. Markpoints stored by the ownship will be displayed as a small yellow X symbol
        on the HSD and HAD MFD formats. (See Storing a Markpoint for more information.)
Datalink Markpoint
Datalink markpoints are steerpoints corresponding to another flight member’s selected steerpoint or System-
Point-of-Interest (SPI) and may be used to coordinate reconnaissance or attacks against locations on the
battlefield.
        Datalink Markpoint. Markpoints received via the datalink will be displayed as a large white X symbol
        on the HSD and HAD MFD formats.
During Early Access, the DCS F-16C will store markpoints received through the datalink in the steerpoint range
above 500.
Datalink SEAD Target
Steerpoints 107-127 are used for storing SEAD targets received through the datalink. Datalink SEAD targets are
steerpoints corresponding to an air defense radar threat designated by another flight member and may be used
to coordinate attacks against enemy air defenses on the battlefield.
        Datalink SEAD Target. SEAD Targets received via the datalink will be displayed as a yellow threat
        symbol with a slash on the HSD and HAD MFD formats. The type of threat is indicated by the character(s)
        that comprise the symbol itself.
Editing a Steerpoint
Steerpoints may be edited using the Integrated Control Panel (ICP) while the STPT or DEST pages are displayed
on the DED. The STPT page allows the pilot to edit the latitude, longitude, elevation, and desired Time-Over-
Steerpoint of the currently selected steerpoint only. If the pilot intends to edit a steerpoint that is not the selected
steerpoint for navigation, or the offset aimpoints of any steerpoint within the range of 1-25, these edits must be
performed using the DEST DED page.
When working in conjunction with ground forces or other aircraft that primarily relay coordinates using the Military
Grid Reference System (MGRS), which is a UTM-derived coordinate system, steerpoints 21-25 may be initially
input using MGRS and then converted to the Latitude/Longitude coordinate format used by the F-16 navigation
system. When the DEST DED page is initially accessed, it will default to a UTM DEST page, providing an immediate
an efficient method for inputting MGRS coordinates as a steerpoint location.


STPT DED Page
The Steerpoint DED page is accessed by pressing the 4/STPT button on the ICP keypad when the CNI DED page
is displayed. This page displays the position and elevation of the currently selected steerpoint, along with the
desired Time-Over-Steerpoint (TOS), all of which can be modified from this page.
                                              1. Selected Steerpoint



                2. Steerpoint Latitude                                                                             6. Steerpoint Sequencing


              3. Steerpoint Longitude
                                                                                                                   7. DED Asterisks

               4. Steerpoint Elevation

      5. Desired Time-Over-Steerpoint


                                                                                                      Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                                         Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                     Reject
                                                                                                                                Toggle display
                                                                                        Return DED                              between MGRS
                                     Accept                                                                                     and Lat/Long
                                                                                        to CNI page
                                                                                                                                (21-25 only)


                           Operate                       Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                      to the next data field


1.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks may be placed over the data field and a steerpoint
     number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
2.   Steerpoint Latitude. Displays the latitude (in DD° MM.MMM’ format) of the selected steerpoint. May be
     modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value in DDMMMMM format using the
     ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
3.   Steerpoint Longitude. Displays the longitude (in DDD° MM.MMM’ format) of the selected steerpoint. May
     be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value in DDDMMMMM format using
     the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Steerpoint Elevation. Displays the elevation (in feet above Mean Sea Level, MSL) of the selected
     steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value (in feet) using
     the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   Desired Time-Over-Steerpoint. Displays the desired Time-Over-Steerpoint (TOS) of the selected
     steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a time in HHMMSS
     format using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
6.   Steerpoint Sequencing. Displays the steerpoint sequencing mode. May be toggled between MAN and
     AUTO by pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP while the DED asterisks are over the data field and the
     selected steerpoint is 1-20. If the selected steerpoint is 21 or greater, this data field will not be selectable.
     •    MAN. The selected steerpoint must be manually changed by the pilot. Manual sequencing is the default
          sequencing mode.
     •    AUTO. The selected steerpoint will be automatically sequenced to the next steerpoint in the current
          navigation route when the aircraft is within 2 nautical miles of the selected steerpoint and the range to
          the selected steerpoint is increasing. The selected steerpoint may be manually changed by the pilot.
          Automatic steerpoint sequencing will only be functional for steerpoints 1-20. Automatic steerpoint
          sequencing will be disabled if the master mode is set to Air-to-Ground (A-G), if the FIX DED page is
          displayed, or if the MAN ACAL DED page is displayed.
7.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
STPT Page – MGRS coordinate format
If the selected steerpoint is within the range of 21-25, the STPT page may be toggled to the Military Grid
Reference System (MGRS) coordinate format by momentarily pressing the DCS “Dobber” switch to the SEQ
position. After a 3-second delay, the MGRS grid zone designator, square, and easting/northing coordinates of the
steerpoint location will be displayed, along with the steerpoint elevation.




                STPT Page – Latitude/Longitude format (Left) and MGRS format (Right)
                                                     (right)
All steerpoints must be in Latitude/Longitude (degrees/minutes/decimal) format to be stored within the navigation
database. However, steerpoints 21-25 may be input using the MGRS coordinate format and then converted to
Latitude/Longitude. Alternatively, steerpoints 21-25 may be input using the Latitude/Longitude coordinate format
and the corresponding MGRS coordinates of the location may be viewed for pilot reference or relayed to other
forces over the radio.
MGRS coordinates may be input using the STPT or DEST DED pages. In either case, after the MGRS coordinates
have been input, a conversion of the MGRS coordinates to the equivalent Latitude/Longitude coordinate format
must be manually commanded by moving the DED asterisks around the CNVRT data field and pressing ENTR on
the ICP keypad. When the conversion is complete, the DED asterisks will be placed around the steerpoint data
field automatically. The elevation (ELEV) data field is not required to contain data other than 0 for the conversion
to occur.
NOTE: If a conversion is not completed before the STPT or DEST pages are sequenced to another DED page, or
the DED is otherwise set to any other DED page, the conversion will not complete and the MGRS coordinates that
were input will not be stored for that steerpoint.
The Military Grid Reference System (MGRS) is described later within this chapter. For more information regarding
inputting steerpoints 21-25 using the MGRS coordinate format, see Converting MGRS to Latitude/Longitude.
UTM DEST DED Page
The Destination DED pages are accessed by pressing the 1/T-ILS button on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED
page is displayed. The first DEST DED page is the UTM Destination page, which display steerpoints 21-25 for the
purposes of MGRS coordinate entry. The Military Grid Reference System is a UTM-derived coordinate system used
as an alternative to Latitude/Longitude and is the primary coordinate system used by many military ground forces.
All steerpoints must be in Latitude/Longitude format to be stored within the navigation database. If a steerpoint
is input using MGRS, then a conversion to Latitude/Longitude must be commanded. If a conversion is not
commanded before the DED page is changed or a different steerpoint is selected, the MGRS coordinates that
were input will not be stored for that steerpoint and the Latitude/Longitude coordinates will not correctly
correspond with the MGRS location. (See Converting MGRS to Latitude/Longitude for more information.)
                                               1. Steerpoint Number



      2. Steerpoint Grid Zone Designator                                                                           6. DED Asterisks


          3. Steerpoint Square Identifier
                                                                                                                    7. Convert to Lat/Long
          4. Steerpoint Easting/Northing
                                                                                                                   8. Page Number
                 5. Steerpoint Elevation


                                                                                                     Move DED asterisks to
             Modify                                      Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                                       Return DED                               Cycle DED to
                                      Accept                                           to CNI page                             next DEST page




                            Operate                     Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                     to the next data field


1.   Steerpoint Number. Displays the destination steerpoint number. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker
     may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint (21-25), or the DED asterisks may be placed over the data
     field and a steerpoint number between 21 and 25 may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
2.   Steerpoint Grid Zone Designator. Displays the MGRS Grid Zone Designator of the destination steerpoint.
     May be modified using the ICP keypad and Increment/Decrement rocker.
3.   Steerpoint Square Identifier. Displays the MGRS Square Identifier of the destination steerpoint. May be
     modified using the Increment/Decrement rocker.
4.   Steerpoint Easting/Northing. Displays the MGRS Easting & Northing of the destination steerpoint. May
     be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a 10-digit number using the ICP
     keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   Steerpoint Elevation. Displays the elevation (in feet) of the destination steerpoint. May be modified by
     placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
7.   Convert to Lat/Long. Converts the MGRS coordinates to the equivalent Latitude/Longitude format.
8.   Page Number. Displays the DED page number and indicates that additional pages may be viewed.
DEST DIR DED Page
The second DEST DED page is the Destination Direct page. This page is similar to the STPT DED page, in that it
displays the position, elevation, and TOS of steerpoints within the navigation database. However, unlike the STPT
page, the DEST DIR page permits review and modification of steerpoint data fields without selecting that
steerpoint for navigation.
                                               1. Steerpoint Number



                     2. Steerpoint Latitude                                                                        6. DED Asterisks


                 3. Steerpoint Longitude

                    4. Steerpoint Elevation
                                                                                                                   7. Page Number
         5. Desired Time-Over-Steerpoint


                                                                                                  Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                                      Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                                    Return DED                               Cycle DED to
                                      Accept                                                                                next DEST page
                                                                                    to CNI page




                            Operate                  Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                  to the next data field


1.   Steerpoint Number. Displays the destination steerpoint number. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker
     may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks may be placed over the data field and
     a steerpoint number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
2.   Steerpoint Latitude. Displays the latitude (in DD° MM.MMM’ format) of the destination steerpoint. May
     be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value in DDMMMMM format using
     the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
3.   Steerpoint Longitude. Displays the longitude (in DDD° MM.MMM’ format) of the destination steerpoint.
     May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value in DDDMMMMM format
     using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Steerpoint Elevation. Displays the elevation (in feet) of the destination steerpoint. May be modified by
     placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   Desired Time-Over-Steerpoint. Displays the desired Time-Over-Steerpoint (TOS) of the destination
     steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a time in HHMMSS
     format using the ICP keypad, and then pressing ENTR.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
7.   Page Number. Displays the DED page number and indicates that additional pages may be viewed.
DEST OA1 & OA2 DED Pages
The Destination Offset Aimpoint DED pages display the relative distance, direction, and elevation of the
destination steerpoint’s offset aimpoints, which are maintained relative to their parent steerpoint. If the steerpoint
coordinates are modified, or if the steerpoint is slewed to a different location, the offset aimpoint will be re-
positioned accordingly. Each offset aimpoint and its respective values may be modified from these pages.
NOTE: Offset aimpoint symbols will only be displayed in the HUD and HMCS when selected as the current sighting
point on the FCR or TGP MFD formats. However, if VRP or VIP modes are enabled for the selected steerpoint,
both offset aimpoint symbols will be displayed in HUD and HMCS regardless of the selected sighting point.
                                               1. Steerpoint Number


                                                                                                                   5. DED Asterisks


                      2. Relative Range

                     3. Relative Bearing
                                                                                                                   6. Page Number
           4. Offset Aimpoint Elevation


                                                                                                     Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                                       Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                                       Return DED                               Cycle DED to
                                      Accept                                                                                   next DEST page
                                                                                       to CNI page



                            Operate                     Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                     to the next data field


1.   Steerpoint Number. Displays the destination steerpoint number. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker
     may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks may be placed over the data field and
     a steerpoint number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
2.   Relative Range. Displays the relative distance (in feet) of the offset aimpoint from the destination
     steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP
     keypad, and pressing ENTR. The following values may be used for conversion to feet.
     •    1 Nautical Mile (NM) = 6,076 feet
     •    1 Kilometer (km) = 3,280 feet
     NOTE: If the range value is set to zero, the offset aimpoint will not be displayed in the HUD and HMCS and
     cannot be selected as a sighting point on the FCR and TGP MFD formats.
3.   Relative Bearing. Displays the relative bearing (in degrees, true) of the offset aimpoint from the
     destination steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value
     using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Offset Aimpoint Elevation. Displays the elevation (in feet) of the offset aimpoint. May be modified by
     placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
6.   Page Number. Displays the DED page number and indicates that additional pages may be viewed.
Editing a Steerpoint
Steerpoints may be edited from the DEST DIR DED page, which is accessed by pressing the 1/T-ILS button on
the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is displayed. Steerpoints may also be edited from the STPT DED page
in the same manner as the described below; however, selecting a different steerpoint on the STPT page will also
change the selected steerpoint for navigation.
To edit a steerpoint, perform the following:
1.    ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to cycle to the DEST DIR
      DED page (P2>).
2.    ICP Keypad – Input the steerpoint number.
      or                                                     1. SEQ to DEST DIR page

2.    ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the
      steerpoint number.
3.    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint
      number or RCL to reject it.
LAT
                                                             2. Input the steerpoint number
4.    ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
      around LAT data field.
5.    ICP Keypad – Input 2 for North or 8 for South.         Empty steerpoint

6.    ICP Keypad – Input latitude in Degrees-Minutes-
      Decimals format of DD°MM.MMM’, which is input as
      DDMMMMM in a continuous string of seven
      numbers.
7.    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
      RCL to reject it.
                                                             6. LAT entry
LON
8.    ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
      around LON data field.
9.    ICP Keypad – Input 6 for East or 4 for West.
10. ICP Keypad – Input longitude in Degrees-Minutes-
    Decimals format of DDD°MM.MMM’, which is input
    as DDDMMMMM in a continuous string of eight              10. LON entry
    numbers, to include a leading zero if necessary.
11. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it.
ELEV
                                                       13. ELEV entry
12. ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
    around ELEV data field.
13. ICP Keypad – Input the elevation in feet.
14. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it.
TOS
                                                       16. TOS entry
15. (Optional) ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED
    asterisks around TOS data field.
16. ICP Keypad – Input the desired time in a 24-hour
    time format of HH:MM:SS, which is input as
    HHMMSS in a continuous string of six numbers.
17. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it.
Modifying an Offset Aimpoint
Offset aimpoints may be modified from the DEST OA1 & DEST OA2 DED pages, which are accessed by pressing
the 1/T-ILS button on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is displayed. Only steerpoints 1-25 may be
modified with offset aimpoints, with up to two independently referenced offset aimpoints for each steerpoint.
To modify an offset aimpoint, perform the following:
1.     ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to cycle to the DEST DIR
       page (P2>).
2.     ICP Keypad – Input the steerpoint number.
       or                                                    1. SEQ to DEST DIR page

2.     ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the
       steerpoint number.
3.     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint
       number or RCL to reject it.
4.     ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to cycle to the DEST OA1
       page (P3>) or the DEST OA2 page (P4>).                2. Input the steerpoint number

RNG
5.     ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
       around RNG data field.
6.     ICP Keypad – Input the offset aimpoint range from
       the steerpoint in feet.
7.     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or         4. SEQ to DEST OA1 page
       RCL to reject it.
BRG
                                                             6. RNG entry
8.     ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
       around BRG data field.
9.     ICP Keypad – Input the offset aimpoint true
       bearing from the steerpoint in Degrees-Decimal
       format of DD.D° or DDD.D°, which is input as either
       DDD or DDDD in a continuous string of numbers.
10. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or            9. BRG entry
    RCL to reject it.
ELEV
11. ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
    around ELEV data field.
12. ICP Keypad – Input the offset aimpoint elevation
    in feet.
                                                             12. ELEV entry
13. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it.
Converting a Steerpoint from MGRS
Although the majority of the F-16C steerpoints are displayed in Latitude/Longitude coordinates in
degrees/minutes/decimal format, steerpoints 21-25 may also be displayed in MGRS format. Additionally, these
steerpoints may be input using MGRS coordinates, and then converted to Latitude/Longitude coordinates.
Steerpoints 26-30 are reserved for ownship markpoints and may only be stored via aircraft sensors or edited
using the Latitude/Longitude coordinates; they cannot be input and converted from MGRS. However, they will
display the equivalent MGRS coordinate formats on the MARK DED page for pilot reference. (See MARK DED Page
for more information.)


Military Grid Reference System (MGRS)
The Military Grid Reference System is a coordinate system used as an alternative to Latitude/Longitude and is
the primary coordinate system used by many military ground forces. MGRS is derived from the Universal
Transverse Mercator system which divides a Mercator-projection map of the Earth into 60 zones that are
numbered from 01 starting from the 180° meridian and moving eastward. Each UTM zone number is then further
sub-divided into 20 zone designators starting from the south pole and moving northward, with the south pole
itself split between zone designators A and B and the north pole itself split between zone designators Y and Z. In
addition, several non-uniform UTM zones are in northern Europe and the Norwegian and Barents Seas.




                               Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zones

MGRS further sub-divides the UTM zones into 100×100 kilometer squares identified by a pair of letters, and then
each 100 kilometer square is further broken down to 1 meter resolution grid coordinates that are numerically
incremented eastward and northward.
In the image above, a portion of the Caucasus region along the western coast of the Black Sea is highlighted in
green. The green highlighted area (expanded on the following page) straddles grid zone designators 37T and
38T. Within that region along the border of South Ossetia is a position on the ground that is identified by the
MGRS grid coordinates below.
                                    Grid Zone Designator   38T LM 86350 67150
                                                    Square Identifier Easting Northing
The expanded map in the image below is split between the grid zone designators of 37T and 38T, with the area
of interest located within the 100×100 kilometer square identified as LM (Blue Shade), and marked by a green
dot. Each 100 km square is further sub-divided into a 100,000×100,000 meter grid.
Note that since the Earth is a sphere and cannot contain a perfect grid of adjacent geometric squares, the 100
km squares that run along the east and west borders of each grid zone designator will not actually be 100 km in
width, but will be truncated to account for the curve of the Earth and the difference in east-west circumference
between the equator and the polar regions across each numbered UTM zone.




                                                               38T LM 10000 90000




                                                                                                38T LM 86350 67150




                                                38T LM 25000 15000




                                   Military Grid Reference System (MGRS)

Within the LM square, the first digit of the easting is attained
by proceeding from zero and moving eastward in intervals of
10 kilometers, and then moving northward in the same manner.
The grid section containing the green dot, LM86 (Orange                              38T LM 86350 67150
Shade), is further expanded in the figure on the right.
As each grid is sub-divided further, the coordinate resolution of
the corresponding location becomes more precise.
•    10-kilometer precision – 38T LM 8 6 (2-digit grid)
•    1-kilometer precision – 38T LM 86 67 (4-digit grid)
•    100-meter precision – 38T LM 863 671 (6-digit grid)
•    10-meter precision – 38T LM 8635 6715 (8-digit grid)
•    1-meter precision – 38T LM 86350 67150 (10-digit grid)
It is important to understand that all grid coordinates must contain an even number of digits to be valid, in that
the easting and northing must be referenced using the same level of precision.
When inputting MGRS coordinates into the F-16C, a 10-digit grid coordinate format must be utilized. During
instances in which the 10-digit precision of a location is not known, such as if ground forces were to relay that
their position was “38T LM 863 671”, the coordinates would be input as 38T LM 86300 67100, with zeros added
to the easting and northing as needed to adhere to the required input format.
Converting MGRS to Latitude/Longitude
MGRS coordinates may be input to steerpoints 21-25 using the UTM DEST DED page, which is accessed by
pressing the 1/T-ILS button on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is displayed. MGRS coordinates may
also be input using the STPT DED page in the same manner as the described below; however, selecting a different
steerpoint on the STPT page will also change the selected steerpoint for navigation.
To input a steerpoint location using MGRS coordinate
format, perform the following:                              1. Empty steerpoint

1.   ICP Keypad – Input the steerpoint number.
     or
1.   ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the
     steerpoint number.
2.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint
                                                             4. GRID entry
     number or RCL to reject it.
GRID
3.   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
     around GRID data field.
4.   ICP Keypad – Input the 2-digit grid zone.
5.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or           4. GRID entry
     RCL to reject it.
6.   ICP Increment/Decrement rocker – Select the
     letter of the grid zone designator.
7.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
     RCL to reject it.
SQUARE
                                                             9. SQUARE entry
8.   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
     around SQUARE data field.
9.   ICP Increment/Decrement rocker – Select the
     first letter of the square as necessary.
10. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it.
                                                             11. SQUARE entry
11. ICP Increment/Decrement rocker – Select the
    second letter of the square as necessary.
12. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it.
EAST/NORTH
13. ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks              14. EAST/NORTH entry
    around EAST/NORTH data field.
14. ICP Keypad – Input the 10-digit easting and
    northing as a continuous string.
15. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it.
ELEV
                                                           17. ELEV entry
16. ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
    around ELEV data field.
       NOTE: Elevation data is not required for the
       conversion process to successfully complete, and
       may be input separately or not at all.
17. ICP Keypad – Input the elevation in feet.
                                                           19. Ready for conversion
18. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
    RCL to reject it.
CNVRT
19. ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
    around CNVRT data field.
20. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to initiate the conversion
    to Latitude/Longitude format. When the conversion
    is complete, the DED asterisks will be placed around
    the steerpoint data field automatically.
       After the conversion is complete, the UTM DEST
       page may be sequenced to the DEST DIR page to                                         20. Conversion complete
       review    the    converted     Latitude/Longitude
       coordinates as described in the remaining steps
       below.
21. ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to cycle to the DEST DIR
    page (P2>).
22. ICP Keypad – Input the number of the steerpoint
    (21-25) that was entered via MGRS coordinates.                              22. Input converted steerpoint number

23. ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint
    number or RCL to reject.
NOTE: If the STPT DED page is used to input MGRS
coordinates, the ICP DCS switch may be momentarily set
to the SEQ position to sequence the STPT page directly
back to the Latitude/Longitude coordinate format for the
current steerpoint after the conversion is complete.
Storing a Markpoint
Markpoints are steerpoints that may be stored during the mission for the purposes of navigation later in the
mission, recording a location of interest during reconnaissance, or for follow-on targeting of sensors and/or
weapons. Markpoints are stored within the steerpoint range of 26-30, using one of four methods best suited to
the current tactical situation and the available sensors onboard the aircraft.
•    HUD. The markpoint location is based on the HUD Mark Cue, which is slewed to the desired markpoint
     location within the HUD or HMCS field-of-view.
•    FCR. The markpoint location is based on the System-Point-of-Interest (SPI) derived from the FCR in Fixed
     Target Track (FTT) or Moving Target Track (MTT) modes.
•    TGP. The markpoint location is based on the System-Point-of-Interest (SPI) derived from the targeting pod
     in POINT track mode.
•    OFLY. The markpoint location is based on the aircraft position during an overflight of the desired location.
•    Manual entry. The markpoint location is directly input via the ICP keypad using Latitude/Longitude
     coordinate format.
See the APG-68 Fire Control Radar and Litening II Targeting Pod chapters for more information regarding the
use of the FCR and TGP for targeting and designation.


MARK DED Page
The Markpoint DED page is accessed by pressing the 7/MARK button on the ICP keypad when the CNI page is
displayed on the DED. When accessed, this page displays the position and elevation of the most recently stored
markpoint. However, the Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to display other markpoint data if desired.
                                                                                  1. Sensor Option



               2. Markpoint Latitude                                                                    6. Displayed Markpoint

             3. Markpoint Longitude
                                                                                                        7. DED Asterisks
              4. Markpoint Elevation

         5. Markpoint MGRS Location


                                                                                             Move DED asterisks to
             Modify                              Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                       Reject
                                                                               Return DED                              Cycle to next
                                     Accept                                    to CNI page                             Sensor Option

                                 Select

                           Operate              Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                             to the next data field


1.   Sensor Option. Displays the sensor that will be used to store the location of the next markpoint. The next
     available option may be selected by momentarily positioning the DCS (“Dobber” switch) to the SEQ position.
     •     HUD. The HUD Mark Cue may be slewed to the desired indication prior to storing the markpoint. When
           the MARK DED page is displayed with HUD as the selected sensor option, VIS sub-mode will be entered,
           the HUD will automatically be selected as SOI, and the FCR will enter AGR mode for accurate ranging.
           (See Storing a Markpoint using HUD or Storing a Markpoint using HMCS for more information.)
     •    FCR. The fire control radar may be used to store the markpoint location when set to Ground Map (GM),
          Ground Moving Target (GMT), or Sea (SEA) modes on the FCR MFD format. If the FCR is already in
          Fixed Target Track (FTT) or Moving Target Track (MTT) when the MARK DED page is accessed, the
          FCR sensor option will be automatically selected. (See Storing a Markpoint using FCR for more
          information.)
     •    TGP. The targeting pod may be used to store the markpoint location when set to Air-to-Ground (A-G)
          mode on the TGP MFD format. If the targeting pod is already in POINT track when the MARK DED page
          is accessed, the TGP sensor option will be automatically selected. (See Storing a Markpoint using TGP
          for more information.)
     •    OFLY. The aircraft position itself may be used to store the markpoint location using a direct overflight.
          (See Storing a Markpoint using OFLY for more information.)
          NOTE: OFLY will be the only functional sensor option if the master mode is set to AAM, MSL, or DGFT.
2.   Markpoint Latitude. Displays the latitude (in DD° MM.MMM’ format) of the displayed markpoint. May be
     modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value in DDMMMMM format using the
     ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
3.   Markpoint Longitude. Displays the longitude (in DDD° MM.MMM’ format) of the displayed markpoint. May
     be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value in DDDMMMMM format using
     the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Markpoint Elevation. Displays the elevation (in feet) of the displayed markpoint. May be modified by
     placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   Markpoint MGRS Location. Displays the MGRS location of the displayed markpoint. May be modified
     using the ICP keypad.
6.   Displayed Markpoint. Displays the steerpoint number that corresponds with the Latitude/Longitude and
     MGRS coordinates currently displayed on the DED. When a new markpoint is stored, this number will
     automatically increment up to the next steerpoint number. Markpoints can only be stored in steerpoints 26-
     30, in sequential order. If a markpoint is already stored in steerpoint 30, the next markpoint will be stored
     in 26, overwriting the previous markpoint coordinates. Each subsequent markpoint that is stored will
     overwrite steerpoints 26-30 in a cyclic fashion.
7.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Any time the markpoint displayed on the MARK DED page is also the selected steerpoint, a highlighted STPT label
will appear in the top right corner of the DED. The displayed markpoint may be set as the selected steerpoint by
setting the DED asterisks around the Sensor Option data field and pressing the 0/M-SEL button.


                                                                                      Markpoint to Steerpoint




NOTE: After designating a markpoint using the TGP or FCR in NAV master mode or A-G master mode (when set
to a pre-planned weapon delivery sub-mode), it may be necessary to use the Cursor Zero (CZ) command to
remove any slews of the Navigation cursor. This can be commanded by pressing CZ (OSB 9) on the TGP or FCR
MFD formats, or CZ (OSB 10) on the HSD MFD format.
Storing a Markpoint using HUD
The HUD Mark Cue may be used to designate a location on the ground for storing a markpoint. When the “HUD”
sensor option is selected on the MARK DED page, VIS sub-mode will be entered, the HUD will be selected as SOI,
and the FCR will enter AGR mode for accurate ranging.
If DMS Aft-Short is used to select a different SOI, VIS mode will be exited and the avionics will return to the
previous sub-mode. To re-enable the HUD Mark Cue, the sensor option on the MARK page must be cycled back
to HUD by momentarily and repeatedly pressing the DCS switch to the SEQ position.
To store a markpoint using the HUD Mark Cue,
perform the following:
                                                          HUD is SOI                Mark Cue caged to FPM
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select HUD in the
     sensor option data field.
3.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew
     the Mark Cue to the desired location within the
     HUD field-of-view.
                                                          VIS Sub-mode                       2. HUD sensor option
4.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to ground
     stabilize the Mark Cue.
5.   (Optional) RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch
     (Throttle) – Adjust the Mark Cue, as necessary.
6.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate
     the location as a markpoint.
                                                                                    3. Mark Cue slewed to desired
     or                                                                            location and TMS Forward-Short
                                                                                     is pressed to ground stabilize
6.   TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to cage the Mark
     Cue to the HUD FPM without designating the
     markpoint.



                                                                                            6. TMS Forward-Short
                                                                                            is pressed 2nd time to
                                                                                             designate markpoint
Storing a Markpoint using HMCS
As an extension of the HUD, the HMCS may be used to position the HUD Mark Cue to designate a location on the
ground outside of the HUD field-of-view for storing a markpoint. As such, it uses the same logic as the HUD.
When the “HUD” sensor option is selected on the MARK DED page, VIS sub-mode will be entered, the HUD will
be selected as SOI, and the FCR will enter AGR mode for accurate ranging. Pressing TMS Forward-Long will slave
the Mark Cue to the HMCS Aiming Cross.
To return the Mark Cue to the HUD, the Mark Cue must be caged back to the HMCS Aiming Cross using TMS Aft-
Short if the Mark Cue has already been ground stabilized. If the Mark Cue is already caged back to the HMCS
Aiming Cross, pressing TMS Aft-Short will return the Mark Cue to the HUD FPM.
If DMS Aft-Short is used to select a different SOI, VIS mode will be exited and the avionics will return to the
previous sub-mode. To re-enable the HUD Mark Cue, the sensor option on the MARK page must be cycled back
to HUD by momentarily and repeatedly pressing the DCS switch to the SEQ position.
To store a markpoint using the HUD Mark Cue through
the HMCS, perform the following:                                                       3. TMS Forward-Long sets
                                                                                      the SOI from HUD to HMCS
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select HUD in the sensor
     option data field.
3.   TMS Forward-Long (Stick) – Press to select the
     HMCS as SOI.
4.   Place the HMCS Aiming Cross over the desired
     location by head movement.
5.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to ground
     stabilize the Mark Cue.
6.   (Optional)      RDR     CURSOR/ENABLE       switch
     (Throttle) – Adjust the Mark Cue, as necessary.
                                                                                    5. TMS Forward-Short ground
7.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate the                                stabilizes the Mark Cue
     location as a markpoint.
     or
7.   TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to cage the Mark
     Cue to the HMCS Aiming Cross without
     designating the markpoint.




                                                                                   7. TMS Forward-Short is pressed
                                                            2. HUD sensor option   2nd time to designate markpoint
Storing a Markpoint using FCR
The FCR may be used to designate a location on the ground for storing a markpoint when set to Ground Map
(GM), Ground Moving Target (GMT), or Sea (SEA) modes on the FCR MFD format, in Fixed Target Track (FTT)
or Moving Target Track (MTT), and the “FCR” sensor option is selected on the MARK DED page.
To store a markpoint using the FCR, perform the
following:                                                    1. DMS Aft-Short is                 2. FCR crosshairs are
                                                           pressed to set FCR as SOI           slewed to desired location
1.   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the
     FCR as SOI on the applicable MFD.
2.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the
     FCR crosshairs to the desired location on the FCR
     MFD format.
3.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the
     FCR to Fixed Target Track (FTT).
4.   ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
     NOTE: If the FCR is already in FTT when the MARK
     DED page is displayed, the sensor option is
     automatically set to “FCR” and step 5 is not
     required.
5.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select FCR in the sensor
     option data field, if necessary.
6.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate the
     FTT location as a markpoint.                          3. TMS Forward-Short is pressed
                                                           to enter Fixed Target Track (FTT)
     or
6.   TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject Fixed
     Target Track (FTT) without designating the
     markpoint.




                                                                                        6. TMS Forward-Short is pressed
                                                          5. FCR sensor option          2nd time to designate markpoint
Storing a Markpoint using TGP
The TGP may be used to designate a location on the ground for storing a markpoint when when set to Air-to-
Ground (A-G) mode on the TGP MFD format, in POINT track, and the “TGP” sensor option is selected on the
MARK DED page.
To store a markpoint using the TGP, perform the
                                                                 1. DMS Aft-Short is                2. TGP crosshairs are
following:                                                    pressed to set TGP as SOI          slewed to desired location

1.   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the
     TGP as SOI on the applicable MFD.
2.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the
     TGP line-of-sight crosshairs to the desired location
     on the TGP MFD format.
3.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the
     TGP to POINT track.
4.   ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
     NOTE: If the TGP is already in POINT track when
     the MARK DED page is displayed, the sensor option
     is automatically set to “TGP” and step 5 is not
     required.
5.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select TGP in the sensor
     option data field, if necessary.
6.   (Optional) LASER ARM Switch (MISC panel) – Set
     to LASER ARM position, if necessary.                      3. TMS Forward-Short is
                                                             pressed to enter POINT track
7.   (Optional) Trigger (Stick) – Pull and hold to gain
     accurate range data.
     NOTE: Although it is not required to fire the TGP’s
     laser rangefinder/designator when storing a
     markpoint, it will increase the accuracy of the
     markpoint position, particularly when at low altitude
     and/or shallow look-down angles.
8.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate the
     TGP location as a markpoint.
     or
8.   TMS Right-Short (Stick) – Press to switch to AREA
     track without designating the markpoint.
9.   Trigger (Stick) – Release.




                                                                                            6. TMS Forward-Short is pressed
                                                             5. TGP sensor option           2nd time to designate markpoint
Storing a Markpoint using OFLY
A markpoint may be stored by directly overflying the intended location and using the aircraft’s current position
to designate the markpoint location when the “OFLY” sensor option is selected on the MARK DED page.
NOTE: If OFLY is displayed in the sensor option data field on the MARK DED page, TMS Forward-Short will
designate a markpoint regardless of the selected SOI.
To designate a markpoint at the current aircraft
position, perform the following:
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select OFLY in the
     sensor option data field.
     NOTE: OFLY will be the only functional sensor
     option if the master mode is set to AAM, MSL, or
     DGFT.
3.   Maneuver the aircraft as necessary to ensure the                                        2. OFLY sensor option

     flight path will take it over the intended
     markpoint location.
4.   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate
     the location as a markpoint as the aircraft passes
     directly overhead the intended location.




                                                                                                4. Markpoint stored




Modify a markpoint using manual entry of latitude/longitude coordinates and elevation
A markpoint may be manually created on the MARK DED page by inputting latitude, longitude, and elevation data
using the ICP. This procedure functions identically to manual data entry on the STPT or DEST DED pages.
Additionally, position data of existing markpoints that have already been stored may be edited in a similar manner,
if necessary.
NOTE: MGRS coordinates cannot be converted to Latitude/Longitude on the MARK DED page. As such, a
markpoint cannot be manually input via MGRS. Only steerpoints 21-25 can be input via MGRS and subsequently
converted to Latitude/Longitude format. (See Converting MGRS to Latitude/Longitude for more information.)
NAVIGATION ROUTES
The F-16C navigation system can be configured with up to three unique navigation routes, composed of sequential
steerpoints within the Navigation partition of the database. Each steerpoint within the range of 1-25 may be
assigned to a single navigation route, the sequence of which is driven by the steerpoint numbers themselves.
However, navigation steering is always referenced to the selected steerpoint on the DED, regardless of whether
the steerpoint is part of a navigation route or whether the steerpoint is within the Navigation partition of 1-25.
NOTE: Navigation Routes 2 and 3 are not implemented in DCS: F-16C Viper.




Navigation routes are composed during pre-mission planning, in which steerpoints within the Navigation partition
are assigned to one or none of the three navigation routes. When planning a mission, it is useful to have multiple
ingress and/or egress routes to and from the objective area. Although navigation routes may be created to
correspond to a flight plan, they should not be exclusively considered as such; but rather avenues to reach the
objective(s), a means of flight coordination and timing to or from mission objective(s), or a method to plan for
contingencies such as egressing along an alternate route or navigating to a divert airfield for landing.
The steerpoints that compose a navigation route only determine the order by which steerpoints are automatically
sequenced as each steerpoint within the route is passed. If steerpoint sequencing is set to AUTO on the STPT
DED page, the next steerpoint in the navigation route sequence will automatically be selected when the aircraft
is within 2 nautical miles of the currently selected steerpoint and the range to the selected steerpoint begins to
increase. However, automatic sequencing will only be performed between steerpoints 1-20.
Automatic sequencing will be suspended under any of the following conditions.
•    The master mode is set to Air-to-Ground (A-G).
•    The FIX DED page is displayed.
•    The MAN ACAL DED page is displayed.
Under such conditions, automatically sequencing to the next steerpoint in the navigation route may disrupt an
air-to-ground attack, such as laser designating a target for a precision munition while overflying a target
steerpoint, or if performing an update to the Inertial Navigation System (INS).
Creating a Navigation Route using the Mission Editor
When using the Mission Editor, waypoints placed on the map from the Airplane Group’s Route tab will
autopopulate into the DCS: F-16C as steerpoints. Each waypoint following the initial Airplane Group position
(waypoint 0) will be displayed as a steerpoints on the HSD as part of Navigation Route 1, and will be numbered
in accordance with their sequence within the Mission Editor.
NOTE: It is currently only possible to generate one navigation route in the Mission Editor. The remaining two
navigation routes will be empty of any steerpoints and will not be shown on the HSD.

   Initial position of Airplane Group                       STPT 7 in Nav Route 1




                                                              STPT 1 in Nav Route 1

                                                                                                      STPT 2 in Nav Route 1


                                    STPT 8 in Nav Route 1



   STPT 9 in Nav Route 1
                                                                   STPT 3 in Nav Route 1
                                                                                                      STPT 6 in Nav Route 1




                                                                              STPT 4 in Nav Route 1   STPT 5 in Nav Route 1


                                             Mission Editor – Airplane Group Route

Steerpoints within the F-16C’s navigation database are input and displayed in three dimensions, therefore it is
typically advisable to set the altitude of all waypoints for the player’s Airplane Group within the Mission Editor to
the minimum value, which corresponds with ground level; especially if intended to mark a specific location,
landmark, or target. However, under certain circumstances it may be useful to place steerpoints at altitudes
above ground if such steerpoints are to be used for navigation, such as building 3-dimensional instrument
approaches during low-visibility conditions.
NOTE: The waypoint altitudes for AI-only Airplane Groups must be set at the altitude at which they are intended
to fly. However, if a steerpoint is to be used for orienting the player aircraft’s sensors for the purposes of targeting
or performing corrections to the navigation system through the use of surface landmarks, the waypoint altitudes
should be placed at ground level. (See Sighting Points and Cursor Slews in the Tactical Employment chapter for
more information.)
Navigation by Steerpoints
Navigation by steerpoints is the primary method of navigation during a mission. Information regarding the
selected steerpoint is displayed at multiple locations within the cockpit, including the HUD, MFDs, and the EHSI.




                                                                               Great Circle Steering Cue


                                                                               Diamond Symbol




                                                                               Time To Go

                                                                                Distance to Steerpoint/
                                                                                  Steerpoint Number

                                                                                                           Selected
                                                                                                          Steerpoint




     Selected Steerpoint
                                                                                                          Horizontal
                                                                                                          Situation
                                                                                                           Display
                                                   Electronic Horizontal
                                                Situation Indicator (EHSI)




                                     Steerpoint Navigation Information

The Heads-Up Display (HUD) overlays virtual symbols and navigation information within the pilot’s forward view,
permitting the pilot to maintain a “heads-out” view from the cockpit. This is particularly useful when avoiding
terrain during low-level flight maneuvers, when approaching a target location that is marked by a steerpoint, or
when maintaining formation near other friendly aircraft.
As an extension of the HUD, the Helmet-Mounted Cueing System (HMCS) provides some of the same information,
allowing the pilot to visually identify the steerpoint location through the canopy at any viewing angle.
The Multi-Function Displays (MFD) include several formats that display steerpoint navigation information.
•    The Horizontal Situation Display (HSD) format provides the most navigation information, particularly a
     graphical representation of navigation route(s) and steerpoint locations, along with many other symbology
     elements that illustrates where the aircraft is located within the battlespace at any point during the mission.
•    The HARM Attack Display (HAD) format is similar to the HSD format and provides the same presentation of
     navigation route(s) and steerpoint locations.
•    The Fire Control Radar (FCR) format displays the selected steerpoint location when set to Combined Radar
     Modes (CRM), allowing the pilot to see where radar tracks are located in relation to fixed geographical
     reference point.
The Electronic Horizontal Situation Display (EHSI) allows the pilot to precisely navigate along any course while
using steerpoints, TACAN, or ILS as the source of navigation, even if the HUD and/or MFDs are inoperative.
Heads-Up Display (HUD)
In addition to the Heading Scale and Flight
Path Marker (FPM), the following HUD                     Flight Path Marker (FPM)                   4. Great Circle Steering Cue
symbology elements are used when
navigating by steerpoints.
                                                                                                                     Steering Cue
1.     Diamond Symbol. Displays the 3-                                                                                boundaries

       dimensional position of the selected
       steerpoint within the HUD field-of-view.
       An X is superimposed across the symbol
       itself any time it is outside the HUD field-
       of-view.
2.     Time to Go. Displays the time that is
       estimated to elapse before arriving at the
                                                                                                                     Slant Range
       selected steerpoint, based on the current
       ground speed.
3.     Distance to Steerpoint/Steerpoint
       Number. The distance to the selected                                                           3. Distance to Steerpoint/
       steerpoint is displayed to the left of the        1. Diamond Symbol          2. Time To Go        Steerpoint Number
       chevron in 1 nautical mile increments.
       The selected steerpoint number is                               HUD Navigation Information
       displayed to the right of the chevron.
       NOTE: The Slant Range data field displayed above the Time To Go indicates the direct, straight-line distance
       from the aircraft’s 3-dimensional position to the selected steerpoint, target, or SPI location. The Distance to
       Steerpoint indicates the 2-dimensional navigational range from the aircraft’s position across the ground.
4.     Great Circle Steering Cue. Provides a lateral steering indication to the selected steerpoint. The steering
       cue functions using the great circle method, in that the most direct route across a 3-dimensional sphere is
       used to determine the course to the destination instead of a fixed heading across a 2-dimensional surface.
       The position of the steering cue is stabilized to a horizontal plane adjacent to the Flight Path Marker (FPM)
       and aligned to the horizon, and indicates the direction that the pilot must turn toward the selected steerpoint.
       If the virtual position of the steerpoint (as seen through the HUD) is beyond the lateral displacement
       boundaries of the steering cue, the steering cue will remain pinned to left or right edge of the boundary.




                                                         Selected    Steerpoint



     Selected   Steerpoint



                                                                                                          Selected      Steerpoint




                                                Great Circle Steering Cue

       The line extending from the cue indicates the relative bearing to the selected steerpoint from the nose. If
       the line is pointed to the 12 o’clock, the steerpoint is directly ahead of the aircraft. If the line is pointed to
       the 3 or 9 o’clock, the steerpoint is 90° to the right or left of the aircraft, respectively. If the line is pointed
       to the 6 o’clock, the steerpoint is behind the aircraft.
Horizontal Situation Display (HSD)
The HSD MFD format provides a birds-eye
view of the battlespace surrounding the               3. Selected Steerpoint                     4. Navigation Route
aircraft, to include steerpoints and the
navigation route(s).
1.     Ownship. Depicts the location of the
       ownship.
2.     Steerpoints. Steerpoints that are not
       the selected for navigation are displayed
       as hollow white circles.                       1. Ownship
3.     Selected Steerpoint. The steerpoint
       selected for navigation is displayed as a
       solid white circle.
4.     Navigation       Route.      The    active
       navigation route is displayed as a solid
       white line linking sequential steerpoints.
5.     Azimuth Steering Line. Displays the
       alignment of the aircraft heading relative
       to the selected steerpoint, SPI, or
                                                       5. Azimuth Steering Line                          2. Steerpoints
       weapon release solution. If the line is
       offset left or right from the center of the
       watermark, the pilot must turn towards                       HSD Navigation Information
       the steering line until centered on the
       watermark.


Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicator (EHSI)
The EHSI is a color liquid-crystal display that provides a top-down orientation of the navigation situation centered
on the aircraft. The EHSI allows the pilot to precisely navigate along any course relative to a steerpoint, TACAN
station, or ILS localizer, even if the HUD and MFDs are inoperative. (See TACAN or ILS for more information.)

               1. Bearing Pointer                                                      2. Lubber Lines


               3. Range Indicator                                                      4. Course Indicator



     5. Magnetic Heading Compass                                                       6. Heading Marker


                                                                                       8. To-From Indicator
                7. Course Pointer
                                                                                           (Not shown)


          11. New Mode Indicator
                                                                                       9. Course Deviation Scale


              12. Aircraft Symbol
                                                                                       10. Course Deviation Indicator


            13. Heading Set Knob                                                       14. Course Set/Brightness Knob


     15. Instrument Mode Selector                                                      16. Selected Instrument Mode
1.   Bearing Pointer. Indicates the bearing to the selected navigation source, depending on the selected mode.
     If the Instrument mode is set to NAV, the pointer will indicate the bearing to the selected steerpoint. If the
     Instrument mode is set to TCN or TCN/PLS, the pointer will indicate the bearing to the selected TACAN
     station if receiving a valid bearing signal.
2.   Lubber Lines. Indicate relative azimuths around the aircraft in relation to the aircraft’s heading
     independently of the magnetic heading compass, in 45° increments.
3.   Range Indicator. Displays the range in nautical miles (NM) to the selected navigation source, depending
     on the selected mode. If the Instrument mode is set to NAV, the range to the selected steerpoint is displayed.
     If the Instrument mode is set to TCN or TCN/PLS, the range to the selected TACAN station is displayed if
     receiving valid DME (Distance Measuring Equipment) signals. The fourth digit of the range indicator
     (highlighted in white) provides a range resolution of 0.1 NM.
4.   Magnetic Heading Compass. Displays the magnetic heading reference around the Aircraft symbol.
     Cardinal directions and numerals to the nearest tens value are placed every 30° of azimuth, major tick marks
     are placed at every 10° of azimuth, and minor tick marks are placed at every 5° of azimuth.
5.   Heading Marker. Indicates the desired heading reference as set by the Heading Set knob. If the Autopilot
     ROLL switch on the MISC panel is set to the HDG SEL position, the aircraft will turn toward and maintain
     this heading value. (See Autopilot for more information.)
6.   Course Indicator. Displays the desired course as set by the Course Set/Brightness knob.
7.   To-From Indicator. Indicates the hemispherical position of the selected TACAN station in relation to the
     desired course. If the To-From indicator is pointed in the same direction as the Course Pointer, the pilot will
     be flying to the TACAN station if proceeding along the desired course. If the To-From indicator is pointed in
     the opposite direction as the Course Pointer, the pilot will be flying away from the TACAN station if
     proceeding along the desired course.
8.   Course Pointer. Indicates the desired course direction as set by the Course Set/Brightness knob.
9.   Course Deviation Scale. Provides a reference scale relative to the Course Pointer along which the Course
     Deviation Indicator is displaced. The scale of deviation is dependent on the selected mode.
     If the Instrument mode is set to NAV or TCN, the inner white dots correspond to a 5° lateral separation
     from the desired course line and the outer white dots correspond to a 10° lateral separation from the desired
     course line.
     If the Instrument mode is set to NAV/PLS or TCN/PLS and receiving a valid localizer signal, the inner white
     dots correspond to a 1.25° lateral separation from the ILS localizer and the outer white dots correspond to
     with a 2.5° lateral separation from the ILS localizer.
10. Course Deviation Indicator. Indicates the lateral deviation from the desired course line along the Course
    Deviation Scale relative to the Course Pointer. If the indicator is aligned with the course pointer, the aircraft
    is aligned with the desired course. If the indicator is offset to either side, the aircraft has laterally deviated
    from the desired course.
11. New Mode Indicator. When the selected Instrument mode is changed, the newly selected mode is
    displayed in front of the Aircraft symbol for 1 second. If the Heading Set or Course Set/Brightness knobs
    are depressed, the “ADJ HDG” or “BRT” messages will be displayed to indicate their respective alternate
    functions are enabled.
12. Aircraft Symbol. Provides a top-down orientation reference of the navigation situation around the aircraft,
    around which the Magnetic Heading Compass rotates.
13. Heading Set Knob. Sets the position of the Heading Marker around the Magnetic Heading Compass. If
    depressed while the INU is set to Attitude (ATT) mode, the knob may be used to manually adjust the
    Magnetic Heading Compass while “ADJ HDG” is displayed. After 2 seconds of inactivity, the knob will revert
    to its normal function and “ADJ HDG” will be removed.
14. Course Set/Brightness Knob. Sets the desired course as displayed by the Course Indicator and Course
    Pointer. If depressed, the knob may be used to increase/decrease the intensity of the EHSI display itself
    while “BRT” is displayed. After 2 seconds of inactivity, the knob will revert to its normal function.
    If the EHSI Instrument mode is set to NAV/PLS or TCN/PLS modes, the EHSI course will be synced to the
    ILS course on the T-ILS DED page but may be modified by rotating the Course Set/Brightness knob.
15. Instrument Mode Selector. Switches through the available Instrument Modes of the EHSI in a cyclic,
    repeating sequence of NAV, NAV/PLS, TCN, TCN/PLS, back to NAV, and so on.
16. Selected Instrument Mode. Displays the navigation source to which the EHSI is providing bearing,
    course, and range indications.
    •      NAV. The EHSI will provide bearing and range indications to the selected steerpoint. Course deviation
           indications will be based on the desired course direction to the selected steerpoint as set by the Course
           Set/Brightness knob.
    •      NAV/PLS. The EHSI will provide bearing and range indications to the selected steerpoint. Course
           deviation indications will be based on the desired course direction to the selected steerpoint as set by
           the Course Set/Brightness knob.
           If the ILS receiver is enabled by the ILS Power/Volume knob on the AUDIO 2 control panel and an ILS
           localizer frequency is entered on the T-ILS DED page, any localizer signals that are received on
           corresponding frequency will take precedence over the selected steerpoint. Course deviation indications
           will be based on ILS localizer signals regardless of the course set by the Course Set/Brightness knob.
    •      TCN. The EHSI will provide bearing indications to the selected TACAN station. Course deviation
           indications will be based on the desired course direction to the selected TACAN station as set by the
           Course Set/Brightness knob. Range indications will be provided if DME signals are received.
    •      TCN/PLS. The EHSI will provide bearing indications to the selected TACAN station. Course deviation
           indications will be based on the desired course direction to the selected TACAN station as set by the
           Course Set/Brightness knob. Range indications will be provided if DME signals are received.
           If the ILS receiver is enabled by the ILS Power/Volume knob on the AUDIO 2 control panel and an ILS
           localizer frequency is entered on the T-ILS DED page, any localizer signals that are received on
           corresponding frequency will take precedence over the selected steerpoint. Course deviation indications
           will be based on ILS localizer signals regardless of the course set by the Course Set/Brightness knob.




                 17. Range Flag



        18. Warning Display Area
                Pointer


                   19. CDI Flag
17. Range Flag. Displayed when range to the selected steerpoint or the selected TACAN station is not available.
18. Warning Display Area. Displays a message indicating a loss in INU data or degraded mode of operation.
     •    INU. The INU is powered off, is not aligned, or has malfunctioned or failed in some manner.
     •    ATT. The INU is set to Attitude (ATT) mode.
19. CDI Flag. Displayed when course deviation indications are unavailable. The Course Deviation Indicator will
    be centered within the Course Pointer and dashed.
EHSI Navigation (NAV) Mode
When set to NAV mode, the EHSI allows the
pilot to set a desired course to the selected         Selected           Steerpoint
steerpoint and precisely navigate that course in
the event the HUD or MFDs are inoperable.
In the example on the right, the pilot has
overflown steerpoint 2 and turned toward
steerpoint 3 after deviating from the planned
navigation route.                                                                                  3. On course

1.   The Course Deviation Indicator on the                                       3
     EHSI indicates the desired course line
     between steerpoints 2 and 3 is 6° to the
     right of the aircraft’s current position.
2.   The pilot turns right toward the Course                 2
     Deviation Indicator to correct the deviation
     and re-intercept the desired course line of
     094° (magnetic) to steerpoint 3. As the
                                                                 094° Magnetic
     aircraft approaches the desired course line,        1
                                                                                                   2. Correcting
     the Course Deviation Indicator moves back
     toward the center.
3.   As the Course Deviation Indicator
     approaches the center of the Course
     Deviation Scale, the pilot starts to turn
     back toward the steerpoint. If properly
     timed, the pilot will roll back to a level
     attitude on the desired course just as the
     Course Deviation Indicator reaches the                                                        1. Off course
     center of the Course Deviation Scale, in
     line with the Aircraft Symbol.                                                  EHSI Navigation Mode

In this example, the pilot performed a course correction by hand-flying the aircraft. However, if desired, the pilot
may utilize the autopilot functions on the MISC panel to assist with navigation and course corrections.
•    With the Autopilot PITCH switch set to the ALT HOLD position and the Autopilot ROLL switch set to the ATT
     HOLD position, roll inputs may be made with the stick to re-intercept and maintain the course.
•    The Heading Set knob may be rotated to align the Heading Marker on the EHSI to the desired intercept
     heading and the Autopilot ROLL switch may be set to the HDG SEL position, which will allow the autopilot
     to turn the aircraft to re-intercept the course.
•    The Heading Set knob may be rotated to align the Heading Marker on the EHSI to the course as the aircraft
     approaches the course line, which will allow the autopilot to turn the aircraft back on-course.
•    The Autopilot ROLL switch may be set to the STRG SEL position after re-intercepting the course, which will
     allow the autopilot to maintain course to the selected steerpoint.
Selecting a Steerpoint
A steerpoint may be selected for navigation from the STPT DED page, which is accessed by pressing the 4/STPT
button on the ICP keypad when the CNI DED page is displayed. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be
used to sequentially cycle through steerpoints within the navigation database any time the current DED page
displays the selected steerpoint in the top right corner of the DED itself and the Increment/Decrement symbol is
placed adjacent to the selected steerpoint data field.
To select a steerpoint using the Upfront Controls,
perform the following:                                       Increment/Decrement Symbol

1.   ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the
     steerpoint number.
     or
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 4/STPT to display the STPT
     DED page.
2.   ICP Keypad – Input the steerpoint number.
3.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint
     number or RCL to reject it.

                                                                                          2. Input the steerpoint number




To select a steerpoint using the Hands-On Controls,
perform the following:
1.   DMS Left or DMS Right – Press as necessary to
     display the HSD format on either MFD.                                                      3. HSD cursor

2.   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to assign the
     Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI) to the HSD MFD format.
3.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE Switch – Slew the HSD
     cursor to the symbol of the steerpoint that is
     intended to be used for navigation.                     4. Selected steerpoint

4.   TMS Up-Short – Press to select the steerpoint
     symbol.




                                                             1. HSD format                                  2. HSD SOI
TACTICAL AIR NAVIGATION (TACAN)
The Tactical Air Navigation system is a radio-based navigation system used primarily by military aircraft. TACAN
is similar to VOR (Very high frequency Omnidirectional Range) navigation stations in that a TACAN station employs
a unique radio signal to provide bearing and distance measurement from aircraft to the station itself, and is
dependent on line-of-sight between the aircraft and the station antenna. However, unlike VOR stations that
operate on VHF frequencies, TACAN operates on UHF frequencies, offers increased precision and range, and
includes an inherent DME (Distance Measuring Equipment) function.




Although terrestrial TACAN stations are often co-located and combined with VOR stations, referred to as
“VORTAC” stations, TACAN is also used by naval vessels such as aircraft carriers to enable aircraft to navigate to
their location for approach and landing. TACAN beacons operate across 126 channels, split between two bands
(X and Y), for a total of 252 usable navigation channels to prevent interference between multiple stations.
Three TACAN modes of operation may be selected through the F-16’s Upfront Controls (UFC).
•    Receive-only (REC). Bearing to the selected TACAN station. Distance measurement is not provided.
•    Transmit/Receive (T/R). Bearing and distance measurement to the selected TACAN station.
•    Air-Air Transmit/Receive (A/A T/R). Distance measurement between two TACAN-equipped aircraft.
The Multifunction Information Distribution System (MIDS) on F-16C
Block 50 aircraft provides both tactical datalink and TACAN
capabilities. As such, the MIDS Low Volume Terminal must be
powered on the AVIONICS POWER control panel to enable TACAN
functions through the UFC and enable bearing and range
indications on the Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicator (EHSI).
Tuning a TACAN Station
If the MIDS LVT knob is set to ON, TACAN-related information will
be displayed at the bottom right corner of the CNI DED page. If
the MIDS LVT knob is set to OFF, this data field will be blank.
           TACAN is powered and set to REC or T/R mode. The
           selected TACAN channel and band (X/Y) are displayed.
           TACAN is powered and set to A/A T/R mode. Distance
           measurement is displayed between 00.1 and 99.9 NM.
           TACAN is powered and set to A/A T/R mode. Distance measurement is not available.


T-ILS DED page (TACAN)
The TACAN-ILS DED page is accessed by pressing the 1/T-ILS button on the ICP keypad when the CNI page is
displayed on the DED. This page allows the pilot to configure TACAN or ILS (Instrument Landing System) settings
for radio-based navigation procedures. (See Instrument Landing System for more information.)

                 1. TACAN Mode                                                           5. DED Asterisks


          2. Beacon Identification

               3. TACAN Channel

                  4. TACAN Band


                                                                                  Move DED asterisks to
             Modify                               No function                     the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                    Return DED                              Cycle to next
                                      Accept                        to CNI page                             TACAN mode




                            Operate               No function                      Move DED asterisks
                                                                                  to the next data field


1.   TACAN Mode. Displays the selected TACAN mode of operation. The mode may be cycled between REC,
     T/R, and A/A T/R by momentarily positioning the DCS (“Dobber” switch) to the SEQ position.
     NOTE: If the MIDS LVT is powered off, the TCN Mode will be replaced by OFF in an enlarged font.
2.   Beacon Identification. Displays the 3-character identification received from the selected TACAN station.
     (e.g., “DAN” corresponds with the TACAN station located at Incirlik Air Base).
3.   TACAN Channel. Displays the selected TACAN channel. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over
     the data field, inputting a value between 1 and 126 using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   TACAN Band. Displays the selected TACAN band. May be toggled between X and Y by pressing the ICP
     0/M-SEL button and then pressing the ENTR button.
5.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Tuning a TACAN Station
The TACAN mode of operation, channel, and band may be modified from the T-ILS DED page, which is accessed
by pressing the 1/T-ILS button on the ICP keypad when the CNI DED page is displayed.
To tune a TACAN station, perform the following:
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 1/T-ILS.
2.   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the desired TACAN
     mode of operation, as necessary.
     •    REC or T/R – Select when tuning a ground-
          or naval-based TACAN station.
     •    A/A T/R – Select when employing the TACAN
                                                                                            2. SEQ to desired mode
          in an Air-to-Air mode.                                                                     page
3.   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
     around CHAN data field.
                                                                                       4. Input the channel number
4.   ICP Keypad – Input the TACAN channel (1-126),
     which is input with no leading zeros.
5.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or
     RCL to reject it.
6.   ICP Keypad – Press 0/M-SEL as necessary to
     toggle the band between X and Y.
                                                                                       6. Input 0 to toggle the band
7.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the selected                                          channel number
     TACAN band or RCL to reject it.
8.   Verify the BCN data field displays the correct 3-
     character identifier for the TACAN station that is
     intended to be used for navigation.
9.   (A/A T/R mode only) ICP DCS Switch – RTN to                                        8. Verify the correct TACAN
     display the CNI page as desired to view the distance                                 station is being received

     measurement to the paired TACAN receiver.


Identifying a TACAN Station
TACAN stations typically broadcast a unique, 3-character identifier using Morse code, which allows any receiving
aircraft to confirm the station to which they have tuned their TACAN receiver is the correct station that they
intend to use for navigation. When a valid TACAN signal is received, the T-ILS DED page will automatically display
the identifier in the BCN data field.
However, if desired, the pilot may listen to the raw Morse code
audio signal received from the tuned TACAN station by rotating the
TACAN knob clockwise on the AUDIO 2 control panel.
Once a TACAN station has been tuned and identified, the EHSI
must be configured for TACAN navigation, as described on the
following pages.
Radio Navigation by TACAN
Navigation by TACAN radio signals may be used during operations under Instrument Flight Rules (IFR); or if the
Inertial Navigation system (INS) has malfunctioned in such a manner that it is no longer reliable for navigation
and the aircraft must be recovered to a friendly airfield. Once a TACAN station has been tuned and identified
through the Upfront Controls (as described on the previous page), the EHSI must be set to TCN mode by pressing
the Instrument Mode Selector button on the EHSI itself, after which bearing and distance to the selected TACAN
station may be displayed. (See Electronic Horizontal Situation Display (EHSI) for more information.)
It is worth noting that unlike an INS, TACAN signals require line-of-sight between the aircraft and the TACAN
stations themselves. TACAN signals are generally considered reliable for up to 130 nautical miles, but under some
circumstances may be less, especially at low altitudes.
Radials
Navigation to and from TACAN stations is typically performed along lines known as “Radials”, which protrude
outward from the TACAN station like spokes of a bicycle wheel and are identified by their corresponding compass
direction relative to magnetic north. In the example below, the 270-degree Radial starts at the location of the
TACAN station itself and runs directly west, or 270°, relative to the local magnetic north.
                                                                                      0° Magnetic North




                                            1                          2

 270° Radial




                                                TACAN Radials

Radials are not to be confused with an aircraft’s course. In the example above, two aircraft are established on
the 270° Radial, with one flying inbound toward the TACAN and the other flying outbound from the TACAN.
                                        The aircraft on the left [1] was
  1                                                                            2
                                        initially flying a course of 045° to
                                        intercept the 270° Radial, and
                                        then turned to a course of 090°
                                        to the TACAN station once
                                        established inbound along the
                        TO Indicator    270° Radial.                                                FROM Indicator

                                        The aircraft on the right [2] is
                                        flying a course of 270° from the
                                        TACAN station and is established
                                        outbound along the 270° Radial.


In both cases, the Bearing Pointer indicates the bearing to the TACAN station independently of the Course Pointer.
The To/From Indicator provides an indication as to whether the course set by the pilot corresponds with an
inbound course toward the TACAN station or an outbound course from the TACAN station.
EHSI TACAN (TCN) Mode
When set to TCN mode, the EHSI allows
the pilot to set a desired course to the
selected TACAN station and precisely
navigate along that course.
In the example on the right, the pilot has
set the desired inbound course to the         0° Magnetic North
selected TACAN station as 090° while
approaching the 270° Radial.                                                                 3. On-course

1.   The aircraft is approaching the
     desired course at an intercept
     angle. The Course Deviation
     Indicator on the EHSI indicates the
     desired course line is 10° to the left
     of the aircraft’s current position.
                                                              3
2.   The Course Deviation Indicator on
     the EHSI indicates the desired
     course line is 5° to the left of the                                                    2. 5 degrees off-course
     aircraft’s current position.
3.   As the Course Deviation Indicator
     approaches the center of the                                          2
     Course Deviation Scale, the pilot
     begins a right turn toward the                                            1
     Course Pointer. If properly timed,
     the pilot will roll back to a level
     attitude on the desired course just
     as the Course Deviation Indicator                       270° Radial
                                                                                             1. 10 degrees off-course
     reaches the center of the Course
     Deviation Scale, in line with the                                     EHSI TACAN Mode
     Aircraft Symbol.
In this example, the pilot performed a course correction by hand-flying the aircraft. However, if desired, the pilot
may utilize the autopilot functions on the MISC panel to assist with navigation and course corrections.
•    With the Autopilot PITCH switch set to the ALT HOLD position and the Autopilot ROLL switch set to the ATT
     HOLD position, roll inputs may be made with the stick to intercept and maintain the course.
•    The Heading Set knob may be rotated to align the Heading Marker on the EHSI to the desired intercept
     heading and the Autopilot ROLL switch may be set to the HDG SEL position, which will allow the autopilot
     to turn the aircraft to re-intercept the course.
•    The Heading Set knob may be rotated to align the Heading Marker on the EHSI to the course as the aircraft
     approaches the course line, which will allow the autopilot to turn the aircraft back on-course.
Air-to-Air TACAN
Although primarily used to provide bearing and distance to ground- or naval-based TACAN stations, the distance
measuring function of TACAN may be used in an “air-to-air” mode to calculate the slant range between two
TACAN-equipped aircraft. When the TACAN receivers on board each aircraft are set to A/A TR mode, and the
TACAN channels are set precisely 63 channels apart and in the same band (X or Y), the range to the opposite
aircraft is displayed in each aircraft, in nautical miles (NM). (See Tuning a TACAN Station for more information)




               TACAN Mode: A/A TR                                             TACAN Mode: A/A TR
               TACAN Channel: 1Y                                              TACAN Channel: 64Y




                                              Air-to-Air TACAN

Since each pair of TACAN channels may also be utilized across either the X or Y bands, 126 possible TACAN
pairings may be chosen. However, these channel selections must remain deconflicted from any channels in use
by ground- or naval-based TACAN stations within the region to avoid interference or erroneous signals.

                                     Air-to-Air TACAN – Paired channels
  1 ↔ 64      8 ↔ 71       15 ↔ 78     22 ↔ 85     29 ↔ 92      36 ↔ 99    43 ↔ 106     50 ↔ 113    57 ↔ 120
  2 ↔ 65      9 ↔ 72       16 ↔ 79     23 ↔ 86     30 ↔ 93     37 ↔ 100    44 ↔ 107     51 ↔ 114    58 ↔ 121
  3 ↔ 66      10 ↔ 73      17 ↔ 80     24 ↔ 87     31 ↔ 94     38 ↔ 101    45 ↔ 108     52 ↔ 115    59 ↔ 122
  4 ↔ 67      11 ↔ 74      18 ↔ 81     25 ↔ 88     32 ↔ 95     39 ↔ 102    46 ↔ 109     53 ↔ 116    60 ↔ 123
  5 ↔ 68      12 ↔ 75      19 ↔ 82     26 ↔ 89     33 ↔ 96     40 ↔ 103    47 ↔ 110     54 ↔ 117    61 ↔ 124
  6 ↔ 69      13 ↔ 76      20 ↔ 83     27 ↔ 90     34 ↔ 97     41 ↔ 104    48 ↔ 111     55 ↔ 118    62 ↔ 125
  7 ↔ 70      14 ↔ 77      21 ↔ 84     28 ↔ 91     35 ↔ 98     42 ↔ 405    49 ↔ 112     56 ↔ 119    63 ↔ 126

The air-to-air mode of TACAN functions independently of the selected EHSI mode, in that the Selected Instrument
Mode on the EHSI may be set to NAV or PLS without affecting the function.
INSTRUMENT LANDING SYSTEM (ILS)
The Instrument Landing System is a radio-based navigation system used by aircraft to make a precision approach
to a runway during low-visibility, which includes hours of darkness or instrument meteorological conditions (IMC).
ILS employs a pair of directional radio signals that are detected by dedicated radio receivers onboard the aircraft
which provide horizontal and vertical steering guidance to the pilot via cockpit instruments.




                                                                                           Localizer
                                                                                          Transmitter




                                                                                                         Glideslope
                                                                                                        Transmitter




Each ILS system includes two radio transmitters strategically placed near the runway, one that emits a VHF
localizer signal another that emits a UHF glideslope signal.
•    Localizer. The localizer provides horizontal approach guidance and is aligned with the ILS approach course.
     The localizer transmitter is located at the opposite end of the runway from the intended approach direction.
•    Glideslope. The glideslope provides vertical approach guidance and is aligned with the ILS approach angle.
     The glideslope transmitter is located to the side of the runway near the touchdown area.
Some airfields include a series of radio transmitters called “marker beacons” that provide audio and/or visual
cockpit alerts as to when the aircraft has reached a specified distance from the runway touchdown threshold.
•    Outer Marker. The outer marker is typically used to identify the location at which the aircraft intercepts
     the glideslope and should initiate a descent along the ILS approach course.
•    Middle Marker. The middle marker is typically used to identify the point along the glideslope at which a
     missed approach procedure should be executed if the runway is not in sight (≥200 feet AGL).
•    Inner Marker. The inner marker is typically used in the same manner as the middle marker for ILS approach
     procedures that permit a lower missed approach point (<200 feet AGL), subject to specific requirements.
The ILS receiver is powered by rotating the ILS power/volume knob
on the AUDIO 2 control panel clockwise from the OFF position. If
the ILS power/volume knob is set to OFF, the ILS localizer
frequency cannot be edited on the T-ILS DED page.
Tuning an ILS Localizer
If the ILS power/volume knob clockwise from the OFF position, an ILS localizer frequency may be entered into
the T-ILS DED page. ILS localizer frequencies occupy 40 VHF channels between 108 and 112 MHz, separated in
5 kHz intervals and allocated to only those frequencies with an “odd” kHz interval, such as 108.10, 108.15,
108.30, 108.35, etc., up to a maximum frequency of 111.95 MHz. Each localizer frequency is paired with a
corresponding glideslope frequency, which is automatically tuned by the ILS receiver based on the selected
localizer frequency and does not require pilot interaction.


T-ILS DED Page (ILS)
The TACAN-ILS DED page is accessed by pressing the 1/T-ILS button on the ICP keypad when the CNI page is
displayed on the DED. This page allows the pilot to configure TACAN (Tactical Air Navigation) or ILS settings for
radio-based navigation procedures. (See Tactical Air Navigation for more information.)


               1. DED Asterisks                                                         2. ILS Status

                                                                                        3. Command Steering Status

                                                                                        4. ILS Frequency

                                                                                        5. ILS Course


                                                                                 Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                                No function                    the previous data field


                                    Reject
                                                                   Return DED                              Cycle to next
                                    Accept                         to CNI page                             TACAN mode




                          Operate                 No function                     Move DED asterisks
                                                                                 to the next data field


1.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
2.   ILS Status. Displays the state of the ILS receiver as ON or OFF.
3.   Command Steering Status. Indicates that a localizer signal is being received and command steering to
     the corresponding runway is available if the EHSI Instrument mode is set to NAV/PLS or TCN/PLS. If the
     data field is not highlighted, a localizer signal is not being received over the selected ILS frequency.
4.   ILS Frequency. Displays the selected localizer frequency. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks
     over the data field, inputting an appropriate localizer frequency using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   ILS Approach Course. Displays the selected approach course. May be modified by placing the DED
     asterisks over the data field, inputting a magnetic course between 0° and 360° using the ICP keypad, and
     pressing ENTR.
     If the EHSI Instrument mode is set to NAV/PLS or TCN/PLS modes, the EHSI course will be synced to the
     ILS course in this data field but may be modified by rotating the Course Set/Brightness knob on the EHSI
     itself or by editing the ILS course on the DED. If the EHSI Instrument mode is set to NAV or TCN, the ILS
     course may be modified independently of the course set on the EHSI.
Tuning an ILS Localizer
The ILS localizer frequency and course may be modified from the T-ILS DED page, which is accessed by pressing
the 1/T-ILS button on the ICP keypad when the CNI DED page is displayed.
To tune an ILS localizer in preparation for performing a
precision approach, perform the following:
1.   ILS Knob (AUDIO 2 control panel) – Rotate
     clockwise out of the OFF position as necessary.
                                                               4. Input the localizer frequency
2.   ICP Keypad – Press 1/T-ILS. Verify the ILS status
     data field displays ILS ON.
3.   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
     around FRQ data field.
4.   ICP Keypad – Input the localizer frequency, which
     is input as a continuous string of five numbers with
     no leading zeros.
5.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or               7. Input the approach course
     RCL to reject it.
6.   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks
     around CRS data field.
7.   ICP Keypad – Input the approach course, which is
     input as degrees magnetic with no leading zeros.
8.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the selected
     TACAN band or RCL to reject it.


Identifying an ILS Localizer
Localizer antennas typically broadcast a unique, 3-character identifier using Morse code, which allows any
receiving aircraft to confirm the localizer to which they have tuned their ILS receiver corresponds to the correct
airfield and runway for an approach and landing. When a valid localizer signal is received, the CMD STRG data
field on the T-ILS DED page will be highlighted.
However, if desired, the pilot may listen to the raw Morse code
audio signal received from the localizer transmitter by rotating the
ILS knob clockwise on the AUDIO 2 control panel.
Once an ILS localizer has been tuned, the EHSI must be configured
to enable ILS guidance indications.
ILS Approach in Low-Visibility Conditions
Under circumstances in which a pilot cannot visually navigate to an airfield runway for landing while remaining
clear of terrain or other obstacles, the ILS allows the pilot to use cockpit instrumentation to safely and reliably
perform an approach to a runway during nighttime or inclement weather conditions. ILS is used to guide aircraft
in a controlled descent, clear of obstacles and terrain, to a lower altitude where the pilot can transition from
cockpit instruments to visual recognition of the runway environment just prior to touchdown at an airfield.
Unlike TACAN stations, which may be used for navigation across long distances, ILS radio signals are limited to
short distances along a narrow approach corridor to a corresponding runway. However, guidance signals
transmitted by ILS are more precise, permitting pilots to safely descend to lower altitudes near the destination
airfield, increasing the likelihood of visually spotting the intended runway before it becomes necessary to abort
the approach and divert to another airfield.
Glideslope Intercept
Steerpoints or TACAN stations are required to navigate to a 3-dimenisonal position in the sky near the destination
airfield from where the ILS localizer signal is being transmitted. Once the localizer signal on the selected frequency
is received by the onboard ILS receiver, the pilot will receive course guidance to the center of the ILS approach
course in a manner similar to intercepting a TACAN radial. However, when initially acquiring the localizer signal
during an ILS approach procedure, it is likely the aircraft will have not yet intercepted the glideslope.
The most common method of intercepting the glideslope is from below, in which the pilot maintains level flight
along the localizer approach course, at the glideslope intercept altitude, while approaching the glideslope
approach path. The standard glideslope angle is 3°, but the angle may vary depending on obstacles or terrain in
the approach path or the prevalence of specific types of aircraft that frequently operate from the airfield.
                      Outer
                      Marker



         Glideslope
         Intercept




                                            ILS Glideslope Intercept

The altitudes (in feet) above the runway elevation at which the glideslope is intercepted are shown in the table
below, rounded to the nearest hundred feet (ft), based on the glideslope angle and slant distance to the runway.
 SLANT
DISTANCE   15 NM 14 NM 13 NM 12 NM 11 NM 10 NM                        9 NM      8 NM     7 NM      6 NM      5 NM
GS 3.5° +5,600 +5,200 +4,800 +4,500 +4,100 +3,700 +3,300                       +3,00    +2,600 +2,200 +1,900
GS 3.0° +4,800 +4,500 +4,100 +3,800 +3,500 +3,200 +2,900 +2,500 +2,200 +1,900 +1,600
GS 2.5° +4,000 +3,700 +3,400 +3,200 +2,900 +2,700 +2,400 +2,100 +1,900 +1,600 +1,300

Once the glideslope signal has been acquired and the applicable cockpit instruments indicate the aircraft is
approaching glideslope alignment, the pilot initiates a descent.
                  Outer marker beacon. Outer markers in the United States are typically used to identify the
                  location at which the aircraft should intercept the glideslope and initiate the descent along the
                  approach path. However, the locations of outer marker beacons relative to the runway, and their
                  intended use, may vary in other regions of the world.
                  Outer markers generate a 400 Hz audio tone in a repeating “dash” (▬ ▬ ▬) Morse code
                  pattern and illuminate the Marker Beacon light to the right of the EHSI.
Glideslope Descent
Once glideslope alignment has been achieved, the pilot should attempt to maintain a constant descent rate, which
will vary depending on the glideslope angle and the ground speed during the approach. Small adjustments of the
throttle will be necessary to adjust the descent rate in order to remain centered within the glideslope signal.




                                            ILS Glideslope Descent

The descent rates (in feet per minute, or fpm) that are required to maintain glideslope alignment are shown in
the table below, rounded to the nearest ten feet per minute, based on the glideslope angle and aircraft ground
speed (in knots) during the approach.
 GROUND
  SPEED      200       190        180       170        160       150        140       130       120     110

GS 3.5°     -1170      -1110     -1050      -990       -930      -880      -820       -760      -700    -640
GS 3.0°     -1000      -950       -900      -850       -800      -750      -700       -650      -600    -550
GS 2.5°      -830      -790       -750      -710       -670      -630      -580       -540      -500    -460

As the wind conditions may change throughout the approach, which can affect the ground speed relative to the
approach airspeed that is being maintained during descent, the pilot will need to adjust the descent rate as
needed to account for variations in the aircraft’s ground speed.
As the aircraft nears the runway and the localizer and glideslope radio lobes become more narrow, adjustments
to the aircraft’s course and descent rate should be made with care to avoid “chasing the needles” on the HUD
and ADI, which will become more sensitive to any deviations. In addition, during this final phase of the descent,
pilots should avoid becoming distracted with the increased sensitivity of the ILS indications, otherwise they may
inadvertently descend through the Decision Height (see the following page).
MSL FLOOR. The MSL FLOOR altitude alert on the ALOW DED page may be used to trigger a voice warning
message when passing through the Decision Height. If the value of the Decision Height is added to the runway
surface elevation near the touchdown zone, and then input as the MSL FLOOR value on the ALOW DED page,
the “ALTITUDE…ALTITUDE” voice warning message will alert the pilot when passing through the Decision Height.
For example, if the runway elevation is 160 feet and the Decision Height is 200 feet, the MSL FLOOR value would
be set to 360 feet.
CARA ALOW. The CARA ALOW altitude alert on the ALOW DED page may be used to trigger
a visual indication in the HUD when passing through the Decision Height. If the value of the
Decision Height is input as the CARA ALOW value on the ALOW DED page, the Altitude Low
indication will flash in the HUD. For example, if the Decision Height is 200 feet, a value of 200
is input into the CARA ALOW data field, which will be displayed below the Radar Altitude
indication as “AL 200”. When the radar altimeter measures the altitude above ground is below
200 feet, “AL 200” will flash.
Note that the “ALTITUDE…ALTITUDE” voice warning message that normally accompanies a violation of the CARA
ALOW setting is inhibited when the landing gear is deployed. It is also worth noting that if the terrain in the
runway approach path is higher or lower than the runway elevation near the touchdown zone, the Altitude Low
indication may flash before the Decision Height is reached or after the aircraft has already descended below it.
Decision Height
As the aircraft approaches the Decision Height (DH), which is typically no lower than 200 feet above the runway
surface near the touchdown zone, the pilot should attempt to visually recognize the runway approach lighting
system or the runway surface itself.

                                                                                   Middle       Inner
                                                                                   Marker       Marker




                                                                                  Missed
                                                                               Approach Point

                                                             Decision Height                             ~200 feet


                                               ILS Decision Height

Once the aircraft descends through the Decision Height, the pilot must abort the approach if the runway approach
lighting system or the runway surface are not visible, or the aircraft is not in a position to perform a safe landing.
This may be the case if the aircraft is too far left or right of the runway surface and does not have sufficient time
to maneuver over the runway and land with enough runway remaining for braking to a stop. At this point, known
as the Missed Approach Point (MAP), the pilot executes the missed approach procedure if the approach lighting
system or runway could not be seen; and may need to divert to another airfield with weather conditions that are
more favorable for landing.
                 Middle marker beacon. Middle markers in the United States are typically used to identify the
                 point along the approach at which the aircraft is passing through the decision height and should
                 execute a missed approach if the runway is not in sight. However, the locations of middle marker
                 beacons relative to the runway, and their intended use, may vary in other regions of the world.
                 Middle markers generate a 1300 Hz audio tone in an alternating “dot dash” (● ▬ ● ▬) Morse
                 code pattern and illuminate the Marker Beacon light to the right of the EHSI.
                 Inner marker beacon. Inner markers in the United States are typically used to identify a lower
                 decision height along the approach. Performing an ILS approach to a decision height that is
                 below 200 feet above the runway elevation usually requires specific aircrew qualifications and
                 equipment/instrumentation onboard the aircraft.
                 Inner markers generate a 3000 Hz audio tone in a rapidly repeating “dot” (● ● ●) Morse code
                 pattern and illuminate the Marker Beacon light to the right of the EHSI.
EHSI Precision Landing System (PLS) Mode
Once an ILS localizer has been tuned through the Upfront Controls, the EHSI must be set to either NAV/PLS or
TCN/PLS modes by pressing the Instrument Mode Selector button on the EHSI itself. This will enable ILS guidance
indications on the EHSI, the ADI, and within the HUD when localizer and glideslope signals are received.
When a localizer signal on the selected frequency is received by the ILS receiver, the EHSI course indications will
transition from displaying course deviation to the selected steerpoint (NAV/PLS) or the selected TACAN station
(TCN/PLS) to course deviation along the tuned localizer course. However, the Bearing Pointer will remain
referenced to the selected steerpoint (NAV/PLS) or the selected TACAN station (TCN/PLS), independently of the
Course Deviation Indicator.
It is worth noting that when receiving a localizer signal while the EHSI is set to NAV/PLS or TCN/PLS modes, the
Course Pointer and Course Deviation Indicator will be displayed left or right along the Course Deviation Scale
based on the deviation from the center of the localizer signal itself, regardless of the course set on the EHSI.
(See Electronic Horizontal Situation Display (EHSI) for more information.)
Attitude Director Indicator (ADI)
The Attitude Director Indicator, or ADI, displays the aircraft pitch and roll attitude as supplied by the Inertial
Navigation System, or INS. When performing an ILS approach, the ADI displays localizer and glideslope indicators.
(See the Cockpit Overiew section for more information regarding the ADI.)
1.   Glideslope Deviation Indicator. Indicates the relative                       1. Localizer          2. Glideslope
     position of the glideslope along the Glideslope Deviation Scale             Deviation Bar          Deviation Bar

     when performing an ILS approach. If the indicator is aligned
     with the center tick mark, the aircraft is on glideslope.
2.   Glideslope Deviation Scale. Provides a vertical reference
     of relative aircraft position above or below the glideslope
     when tuned to an ILS approach frequency and roughly aligned
     with the approach path for the associated landing area. Each
     white dot corresponds with a 2.5° vertical separation from the
     glideslope. If the Glideslope Indicator is aligned with the top
     or bottom white dot of the Glideslope Deviation Scale, the
     aircraft is 5° above or 5° below the glideslope, respectively.
3.   Glideslope Deviation Bar. Indicates the position of the
     glideslope relative to the Aircraft Symbol when performing an
     ILS approach. If the deviation bar is aligned with the “wings”
     of the Aircraft Symbol, the aircraft is on the glideslope. If the
     deviation bar is above the Aircraft Symbol, the aircraft is
     below the glideslope. If the deviation bar is below the Aircraft
                                                                           3. Glideslope           4. Glideslope
     Symbol, the aircraft is above the glideslope.                        Deviation Scale        Deviation Indicator

4.   Localizer Deviation Bar. Indicates the position of the localizer relative to the Aircraft Symbol when
     performing an ILS approach. If the deviation bar is aligned with the center dot of the Aircraft Symbol, the
     aircraft is aligned with the runway. If the deviation bar is left of the Aircraft Symbol, the aircraft is to the
     right of the runway centerline. If the deviation bar is right of the Aircraft Symbol, the aircraft is to the left
     of the runway centerline.
5.   Glideslope Flag. Displayed when a glideslope (GS) signal is           5. Glideslope Flag               6. Localizer Flag
     not being received.
6.   Localizer Flag. Displayed when the selected localizer (LOC)
     signal is not being received.
Heads-Up Display (HUD)
The following HUD symbology elements will be displayed when performing an ILS approach.
1.   ILS Mode. Displayed when the EHSI
     Instrument mode is set to NAV/PLS or
     TCN/PLS.
2.   Glideslope Deviation Bar. Indicates
                                                      Flight Path Marker (FPM)                         Vertical Velocity Scale
     the position of the glideslope relative to
     the Flight Path Marker (FPM). If the
     deviation bar is aligned with the FPM, the
     aircraft is on the glideslope. If the
     deviation bar is above the FPM, the
     aircraft is below the glideslope. If the
     deviation bar is below the FPM, the
     aircraft is above the glideslope.
3.   Localizer Deviation Bar. Indicates the
     position of the localizer relative to the        1. ILS Mode
     Flight Path Marker (FPM). If the deviation
     bar is aligned with the FPM, the aircraft        2. Glideslope Deviation Bar

     is aligned with the runway. If the
                                                      3. Localizer Deviation Bar                4. Command Steering Symbol
     deviation bar is left of the FPM, the
     aircraft is to the right of the runway
     centerline. If the deviation bar is right of                          HUD ILS Information
     the FPM, the aircraft is to the left of the
     runway centerline.
4.   Command Steering Symbol. Provides lateral and vertical steering indication to intercept and maintain
     alignment with the ILS localizer and/or glideslope. The lateral displacement of the Command Steering symbol
     corresponds with the required bank angle that is necessary to achieve a turn rate for localizer intercept. If
     the Command Steering symbol is displaced left or right from the FPM, the pilot should bank towards the
     Command Steering symbol until the symbol is aligned with the FPM.
                                                                                                 Decrease descent rate




                     Localizer only                                                 Localizer and Glideslope
      Bank left                          Bank right                    Bank left                               Bank right



                                                                                                  Increase descent rate




                                          Command Steering Symbol

     The vertical displacement of the Command Steering symbol corresponds with the required vertical velocity
     that is necessary to achieve the descent rate for glideslope intercept. If the Command Steering symbol is
     displaced above or below the FPM, the pilot should adjust throttle to drive the FPM upwards or downwards
     toward the Command Steering symbol until the symbol is aligned with the FPM.
     If the tick mark on the Command Steering symbol is not displayed, the ILS receiver is not receiving a
     glideslope signal and command steering is only available from the ILS localizer.
Once established inbound on the ILS approach course, it may be helpful to set the Scales switch on the HUD
Control Panel to the VV/VAH position prior to intercepting the glideslope. This will display the Vertical Velocity
Scale to provide an indication of the descent rate directly within the HUD. Each major tick mark on the Vertical
Velocity Scale represents 1000 feet per minute, and each minor tick mark represents 500 feet per minute. The
major tick mark adjacent to the Altitude indication corresponds to 0 feet per minute, or level flight.
If a steerpoint is located at the destination
airfield, the Diamond symbol within the HUD
may be useful in maintaining awareness of the
aircraft’s course and orientation relative to the
airfield in low-visibility conditions. However,     Diamond Symbol                          Vertical Velocity Scale
the pilot should be aware that the steerpoint
may not necessarily indicate the location of
the runway nor the touchdown zone to where
the ILS glideslope is providing guidance.
In addition, the steerpoint at the destination
airfield may be useful in providing the
remaining distance indication to the airfield.
Alternatively, if a TACAN station is located at
the airfield, the Range Indicator on the EHSI
may also provide remaining distance
indication to the airfield, which may be
outlined as part of the ILS approach procedure
on the applicable approach charts. However,         Approach Lighting
just as in the case of the Diamond Symbol, the
pilot should be aware that the distance                              Approach Lighting System
indication from the steerpoint or the TACAN
station may not be to the runway itself.
As the aircraft approaches the decision height (as shown in the image above), the pilot should attempt to visually
recognize the runway approach lighting system or the runway surface itself. The approach lighting system will
typically be easier to recognize due to the distinct light pattern, which may include a rapidly pulsing series of
strobe lights called the Runway Alignment Indicator Lights (RAIL), also known as the “rabbit” lights.
If desired, the MAN RNG/UNCAGE knob may
be depressed to the UNCAGE position to
declutter the lower portion of the HUD to aid
in visual recognition of the approach lighting
or the runway surface. When this occurs, the
Heading Tape will be repositioned to the top
portion of the HUD, the Roll Indicator (if
displayed) and ILS Localizer and Glideslope
Deviation Bars will be removed. However, the
Command Steering Symbol will remain.
Once the approach lighting or the runway is in
sight, proceed visually in accordance with the
Landing procedure, beginning at step 2.
Otherwise, upon passing the Decision Height,
execute a missed approach. Increase throttle,
arrest the descent rate, and begin a climb.
When a positive rate of climb is established,
                                                    Command Steering Symbol
retract the landing gear. Ensure the landing
gear is fully retracted with the gear doors
closed before exceeding 300 KCAS.                            HUD decluttered at Decision Height
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
The F-16C is equipped with two radios, a UHF radio and a VHF radio, which primarily function as the pilot’s voice
communications system with other flight members, allied aircraft, ground forces, and air traffic control. Each
radio is also capable of transmitting and receiving datalink messages relayed through its secure, modem-based
datalink system (SMDL).


                                   VHF Antennas


                                                  Upper UHF/IFF Antenna




                                         Lower UHF/IFF Antenna




                         AN/ARC-164 & AN/ARC-222 Radio Antenna Locations

The AN/ARC-164 UHF AM radio provides two-way line-of-sight communications over UHF-AM frequencies
between 225.000 and 399.975 MHz, and includes a separate GUARD receiver tuned to 243.000 MHz. The radio
is capable of HAVE QUICK frequency-hopping as an electronic counter-countermeasures (ECCM) capability, and
transmissions may be selectively routed through either the upper or lower UHF antennas, mounted to the center
fuselage, which are shared with the AN/APX-113 Advanced IFF transponder/interrogator system. (See ANT SEL
switches for more information.)
The AN/ARC-222 VHF AM/FM radio provides two-way line-of-sight communications over VHF-AM frequencies
between 116.000 and 151.975 MHz or VHF-FM frequencies between 30.000 MHz and 87.975 MHz. The radio is
also capable of receiving VHF-AM radio signals between 108.000 and 115.975 MHz. The VHF radio includes two
antennas embedded within the leading edge of the vertical tail surface; one antenna for transmitting/receiving
VHF-AM radio signals and the other for transmitting/receiving VHF-FM radio signals.
Both radios in the F-16C may be connected to a KY-58 module for secure radio encryption, and both may be
programmed with up to 20 unique radio channels for efficient communications. However, manually tuning either
radio to individual, non-programmed frequencies is also possible, if necessary.
The primary radio interface for both radio systems is through the Upfront Controls (UFC), with a dedicated DED
page for each radio system. However, in the event of a main power failure or a failure within the UFC itself, the
UHF radio may also be controlled through a backup control panel located on the left console.
NOTE: Radio encryption, frequency hopping, and SMDL functions are not implemented in DCS: F-16C Viper.
Communications Management
Communications is an important aspect of all aviation operations, but it takes on an even greater significance
during a tactical mission, especially as a team member within a larger “mission package” of many aircraft.
Whether it be coordinating with a wingman in an aerial dogfight, requesting information from a command and
control asset, or receiving a request for air support from ground forces, communications play a key role in
ensuring teamwork and unity of effort among friendly forces and distributing critical information regarding the
battlespace to the units or personnel that need it.

                                                                                          UHF: 330.500                    UHF: 330.500
                     UHF: 238.750


                                                                                           Ford 5-1                            Ford 5-2
                     Darkstar 2-1



     UHF: 238.750
     VHF: 143.850

                                             UHF: 272.350      UHF: 272.350
     Weasel 1-2
                                                                                       UHF: 251.100             UHF: 250.350
                                             Roman 1-2         Roman 1-1               VHF: 119.100
                              UHF: 238.750                                                                      VHF: 118.100
                              VHF: 143.850                                    Aleppo                                            Jirah


                                                                  FM: 68.225
                              Weasel 1-1
                                                                Palehorse 06
                                                  FM: 42.575
      UHF: 362.125
                                                                                                         FM: 34.950
                                                   Saber 16
      Hawg 3-1
                                                                                                         Jaguar 21




Throughout each phase of the mission, the frequencies to which either radio is tuned may need to be changed
in order to contact different aircraft or units. These may include other friendly aircraft within the same “mission
package”, AWACS command and control aircraft, aerial refueling tankers, ground forces such as Joint Terminal
Attack Controllers (JTAC), or airfield air traffic control (ATC). However, with only two radios onboard, strategic
management of frequencies must be performed to ensure communications is maintained with the correct units
at the correct time during the mission.
Although the radios in the F-16C may be rapidly re-tuned to a different frequency through the Upfront Controls,
the most efficient means of managing the onboard radios is through preset radio channels. By assigning
frequencies that are relevant to the current mission to one of the 20 preset channels for either radio, the pilot
can rapidly switch between frequencies without needing to input the entire frequency each time.
Frequencies that are required to successfully perform a mission are typically noted in the mission briefing and
should be programmed into the aircraft radios before the mission. Prior to takeoff or while en-route to the mission
area or objective, it may be wise to verify the frequencies assigned to each preset radio channel to ensure they
are set appropriately.
The UHF Backup control panel is not typically used during normal operations after the engine is started and the
aircraft is operating on generator power. However, during final checks prior to entering the combat area, it may
be wise to configure this panel to a preset channel and/or manual frequency that would be necessary to request
assistance, direct your wingman to provide support, receive a bearing to the nearest tanker, or receive a bearing
to your home airfield. If there was some sort of main power loss and the aircraft were to revert to battery power
after a malfunction or taking damage from hostile fire, the UHF radio control would revert to the UHF Backup
control panel and the corresponding radio settings.
Upfront Controls
The Upfront Controls are available when the C & I knob is set
to the UFC position on the IFF control panel. During normal
operations, the UFC is used for communications functions. In
the event there is a failure with the UFC, the C & I knob can
be set to the BACK UP position, which allows control of the
UHF radio through the use of the UHF Backup control panel.
If the aircraft is operating on battery power only, control of the
UHF radio will revert to the UHF Backup control panel,
regardless of whether the C & I knob is set to the UFC position.
The UHF radio is commonly used to communicate with the
appropriate air traffic control (ATC) agencies prior to engine
start.


UHF DED Page
The UHF radio DED page may be accessed by pressing the COM 1 override button on the ICP, regardless of the
DED page currently displayed. Pressing the COM 1 button a second time will return to the previous DED page.
This page allows the pilot to immediately tune a preset UHF channel, edit a preset UHF channel, or manually
input a frequency into the UHF radio.

                                                                                                        4. Radio Mode/Power Status

      1. Active Channel/Frequency
                                                                                                         5. Scratchpad

        2. Preset Channel Number
                                                                                                         6. DED Asterisks

      3. Preset Channel Frequency
                                                                                                         7. Receiver Band



                                                                                               Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                             *Cycle to next radio channel                    the previous data field


                                     Reject
                                                                                 Return DED                              Toggle between
                                     Accept                                      to CNI page                             MAIN and BOTH




                           Operate            *Cycle to previous radio channel                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                               to the next data field


* Cycles the Preset Channel Number data field to the next/previous preset radio channel for editing the assigned
frequency of that preset. However the radio will not be tuned to that preset channel or frequency.
1.   Active Channel/Frequency. Displays the preset radio channel or the manual radio frequency to which
     the radio is currently tuned.
2.   Preset Channel Number. Displays the preset channel number that corresponds with the frequency in the
     Preset Frequency data field below. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different
     preset channel, or the DED asterisks may be placed over the data field and a channel number between 1
     and 20 may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
3.   Preset Frequency. Displays the frequency that is assigned to the preset channel number in the data field
     above. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a frequency using the
     ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Modifying this data field does not change the tuned UHF frequency.
4.   Radio Mode/Power Status. Displays the current mode and power status of the UHF radio. The mode
     may be cycled between MAIN and BOTH by momentarily placing the ICP DCS to the SEQ position.
     •    OFF. The COMM 1 power/volume knob on the AUDIO 1 control panel is set to OFF, removing power
          from the UHF radio.
     •    MAIN. The UHF radio is operating on the selected preset channel/radio frequency. The auxiliary
          GUARD receiver of the UHF radio is disabled.
     •    BOTH. The UHF radio is operating on the selected preset channel/radio frequency. The auxiliary
          receiver of the UHF radio is enabled to monitor 243.0 MHz (GUARD).
          NOTE: The UHF radio may be immediately tuned to the international distress frequency of 243.0 MHz
          (GUARD) by rotating the COMM 1 mode knob on the AUDIO 1 control panel to the GD positon.
5.   Scratchpad. This data field is used to input a preset channel number or radio frequency to tune the UHF
     radio. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a preset channel number
     or frequency using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid channel entries range from 1 to 20. Valid
     frequencies range from 225.000 to 399.975, entered in a continuous string without the final digit.
     When a valid preset channel number or radio frequency is accepted into the Scratchpad using the ENTR
     button, the DED will return to the previous page prior to pressing the COM 1 override button.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
7.   Receiver Band. Displays the bandwidth setting of the radio. May be toggled between NB (narrow) and WB
     (wide) by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while the DED asterisks are over the data field. (N/I)
When the C & I knob is set to the BACK UP position on
the IFF control panel, control of the UHF radio will revert
to UHF Backup control panel.
The UHF DED page may still be accessed by pressing the
COM 1 override button on the ICP. However, the page
will be displayed in the BACKUP format and the ICP will
have no effect on the function of the UHF radio. The
page will indicate the currently tuned UHF frequency and
preset channel (if applicable).
VHF DED Page
The VHF radio DED page may be accessed by pressing the COM 2 override button on the ICP, regardless of the
DED page currently displayed. Pressing the COM 2 button a second time will return to the previous DED page.
This page allows the pilot to immediately tune a preset VHF channel, edit a preset VHF channel, or manually
input a frequency into the VHF radio.

                                                                                                            4. Power Status

          1. Active Channel/Frequency
                                                                                                             5. Scratchpad

            2. Preset Channel Number
                                                                                                             6. DED Asterisks

          3. Preset Channel Frequency
                                                                                                             7. Receiver Band



                                                                                              Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                            *Cycle to next radio channel                    the previous data field


                                    Reject
                                                                                Return DED
                                    Accept                                                                              No function
                                                                                to CNI page




                          Operate            *Cycle to previous radio channel                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                              to the next data field


* Cycles the Preset Channel Number data field to the next/previous preset radio channel for editing the assigned
frequency of that preset. However, the radio will not be tuned to that preset channel or frequency.
1.   Active Channel/Frequency. Displays the preset radio channel or the manual radio frequency to which
     the radio is currently tuned.
2.   Preset Channel Number. Displays the preset channel number that corresponds with the frequency in the
     Preset Frequency data field below. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different
     preset channel, or the DED asterisks may be placed over the data field and a channel number between 1
     and 20 may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
3.   Preset Frequency. Displays the frequency that is assigned to the preset channel number in the data field
     above. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a frequency using the
     ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Modifying this data field does not change the tuned VHF frequency.
4.   Power Status. Displays the power status of the VHF radio.
     •    OFF. The COMM 2 power/volume knob on the AUDIO 1 control panel is set to OFF, removing power
          from the VHF radio.
     •    ON. The VHF radio is operating on the selected preset channel/radio frequency.
5.   Scratchpad. This data field is used to input a preset channel number or radio frequency to tune the VHF
     radio. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a preset channel number
     or frequency using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid channel entries range from 1 to 20. Valid
     frequencies range from 30.00 to 87.975 and 108.000 to 151.975, entered in a continuous string without the
     final digit.
     When a valid preset channel number or radio frequency is accepted into the Scratchpad using the ENTR
     button, the DED will return to the previous page prior to pressing the COM 2 override button.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
7.   Receiver Band. Displays the bandwidth setting of the radio. May be toggled between NB (narrow) and WB
     (wide) by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while the DED asterisks are over the data field. (N/I)
When the COMM 2 mode knob on the AUDIO 1 control
panel is set to the GD position, the VHF radio is tuned to
the international distress frequency of 121.5 MHz
(GUARD).
The VHF DED page may still be accessed by pressing the
COM 2 override button on the ICP. However, the page
will be displayed in the AM GUARD format and the ICP
will have no effect on the function of the VHF radio.
Tuning a Preset Frequency using Upfront Controls
A preset UHF or VHF frequency may be tuned by inputting a preset channel number into the Scratchpad data
field on the applicable UHF or VHF DED pages.
To tune a preset frequency using the UHF DED page or
VHF DED page, perform the following:
1.   ICP COM 1 Button – Press to access the UHF DED
     page.
     or
                                                              2. Input the preset channel
1.   ICP COM 2 Button – Press to access the VHF DED
     page.
2.   ICP Keypad - Input the 1- or 2-digit preset channel
     number (1-20).
3.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the channel
     number or RCL to reject it.
                                                              2. Input the preset channel
If the entered number is valid, the radio will be tuned to
the corresponding preset channel and the DED will
return to the previous page prior to pressing the COM 1
or COM 2 override button.
Alternatively, if the applicable radio is already tuned to a preset channel, the radio may be cycled incrementally
through the 20 preset channels on the CNI DED page.
To select a preset frequency using the CNI DED page,
perform the following:
1.   ICP DCS Switch – Up/Down to move the
     Increment/Decrement symbol adjacent to the UHF
     or VHF data field, as necessary.
                                                                                            2. Select the preset channel
2.   ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Press as
     necessary to select the desired preset channel.
Editing a Preset Frequency using Upfront Controls
Preset UHF or VHF frequencies may be edited by inputting a different preset frequency on the applicable UHF or
VHF DED pages.
To edit a preset frequency using the UHF DED page or
VHF DED page, perform the following page:
1.   ICP COM 1 Button – Press to access the UHF DED
     page.                                                                           2. Select the preset channel

     or                                                                                   6. Input the frequency

1.   ICP COM 2 Button – Press to access the VHF DED
     page.
2.   ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the
     preset channel to be edited. (Skip to step 5)
     or                                                                              2. Select the preset channel


2.   ICP DCS Switch – Up/Down to move the DED                                             6. Input the frequency
     Asterisks around the Preset Channel Number data
     field.
3.   ICP Keypad - Input the 1- or 2-digit preset channel
     number (1-20) to be edited.
4.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the channel
     number or RCL to reject it.
5.   ICP DCS Switch – Up/Down to move the DED
     Asterisks around the Preset Channel Frequency
     data field.
6.   ICP Keypad - Input the 4- or 5-digit frequency in
     a continuous string without leading zeros.
7.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the frequency
     or RCL to reject it.
Tuning a Manual Frequency using Upfront Controls
A manual UHF or VHF frequency may be tuned by inputting a valid frequency into the Scratchpad data field on
the applicable UHF or VHF DED pages.
To tune a manual frequency using the UHF DED page or
VHF DED page, perform the following:
1.   ICP COM 1 Button – Press to access the UHF DED
     page.
     or
                                                             2. Input the frequency
1.   ICP COM 2 Button – Press to access the VHF DED
     page.
2.   ICP Keypad - Input the 4- or 5-digit frequency in
     a continuous string without leading zeros.
3.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the frequency
     or RCL to reject it.
                                                             2. Input the frequency
If the entered frequency is valid, the radio will be tuned
to the corresponding frequency and the DED will return
to the previous page prior to pressing the COM 1 or COM
2 override button.
UHF Backup Control Panel
Communication functions are normally controlled through the Upfront Controls, however a backup radio control
panel is also available if a malfunction of the ICP and/or DED has occurred. The UHF Backup control panel may
be used on battery power, and as such is the only radio that can be used prior to engine start.

                                                                                         3. CHAN Display
              1. Preset Channel
             Card & Access Door
                                                                                         4. CHAN Knob

         2. TEST DISPLAY Button
                                                                                         6. STATUS Button

     5. Frequency Status/Display


                  7. A-3-2 Knob                                                          8. Manual Frequency Knobs




               9. Function Knob                                                          10. Mode Knob




                                   11. TONE Button   12. VOL Knob   13. SQUELCH Switch


1.   Preset Channel Card & Access Door. The top of the access door displays the frequencies that correspond
     with each preset selection. Lifting the access door allows the UHF radio presets and anti-jam functions to
     be programmed. (N/I)
2.   TEST DISPLAY Button. Illuminates all display segments within the Frequency Status/Display and CHAN
     Display windows for a functional test.
3.   CHAN Display. If Mode knob is set to PRESET, displays the currently selected frequency preset. If Mode
     knob is set to MNL, the display will be blank.
4.   CHAN Knob. Selects the desired frequency preset.
5.   Frequency Status/Display. Displays the manual frequency that has been selected using the Manual
     Frequency Knobs.
6.   STATUS Button. When this button is depressed, the frequency that the UHF radio is tuned to will be
     momentarily shown in the Frequency Status/Display. This allows the pilot to verify the frequency of the
     currently selected preset when the Mode Knob is set to PRESET.
7.   A-3-2 Knob. Selects anti-jamming or single-frequency functionality of the UHF radio.
     •     A. Selects AJ (Anti-Jam) function of the radio. (N/I)
     •     3. When the Mode knob is set to MNL, sets the 1st digit of the frequency to 3 (e.g., 325.000 MHz).
     •     2. When the Mode knob is set to MNL, sets the 1st digit of the frequency to 2 (e.g., 225.000 MHz).
8.   Manual Frequency Knobs. When Mode knob is set to MNL, permits manual tuning of the frequency in
     0.025 MHz increments from 225.000 MHz to 399.975 MHz.
9.   Function Knob. Selects the functional mode of operation of the UHF radio.
     •     OFF. Power is removed from UHF Backup control panel. If the UHF radio is powered by the battery
           bus or the C & I knob on the IFF control panel is set to BACK UP, this knob position also removes power
           from the UHF radio itself.
    •    MAIN. If COMM 1 power/volume knob on the AUDIO 1 control panel is not set to OFF, the UHF radio
         is operating on the selected preset/frequency. UHF GUARD auxiliary receiver is disabled.
    •    BOTH. If COMM 1 power/volume knob on the AUDIO 1 control panel is not set to OFF, the UHF radio
         is operating on the selected preset/frequency. UHF GUARD auxiliary receiver is enabled to monitor
         243.0 MHz.
    •    ADF. No function.
10. Mode Knob. Selects the tuning mode of the UHF radio.
    •    MNL. The UHF radio is tuned to the frequency displayed in the Frequency Status/Display window.
         Frequency is tuned using the Manual Frequency knobs.
    •    PRESET. The UHF radio is tuned to the frequency that corresponds with the preset displayed in the
         CHAN Display. Preset frequency is selected using the CHAN knob.
    •    GRD. The UHF radio is tuned to 243.0 MHz and the dedicated GUARD receiver is disabled.
11. TONE Button. Interrupts radio reception and transmits a tone on the current frequency. (N/I)
12. VOL Knob. No Function.
13. SQUELCH Switch. Enables/Disables the squelch function.
Tuning a Preset Frequency using the UHF Backup Control Panel
A preset UHF frequency may be tuned by setting the UHF Backup control panel to PRESET mode and selecting
the desired preset channel.
To tune a preset UHF frequency using the UHF Backup
                                                                                                   3. CHAN knob
Control Panel, perform the following:
1.   Function Knob – Set to MAIN or BOTH.
2.   Mode Knob – Set to PRESET.
3.   CHAN Knob – Rotate until the desired preset
     channel is displayed in the CHAN Display indicator.
                                                                                               4. STATUS button
4.   (Optional) STATUS Button – Press to verify the
     frequency assigned to the selected preset channel
     within the FREQUENCY STATUS/DISPLAY indicator.


                                                           1. Function knob                   2. Mode knob




Tuning a Manual Frequency using the UHF Backup Control Panel
A manual UHF frequency may be tuned by setting the UHF Backup control panel to MNL mode and setting the
desired frequency.
To tune a manual frequency using the UHF Backup
Control Panel, perform the following:
1.   Function Knob – Set to MAIN or BOTH.
2.   Mode Knob – Set to MNL.
3.   A-3-2 Knob – Rotate until the first digit of the
     desired frequency is displayed in the FREQUENCY
     STATUS/DISPLAY indicator.
                                                           3. A-3-2 knob      4. Manual Frequency knobs
4.   Manual Frequency Knobs – Rotate until the
     remaining four digits of the desired frequency are
     displayed in the FREQUENCY STATUS/DISPLAY
     indicator.
                                                           1. Function knob                   2. Mode knob
HANDS-ON CONTROLS
The UHF VHF Transmit switch on the Throttle initiates voice communications over the UHF and VHF radios. The
UHF VHF Transmit switch is 4-way switch that continuously transmits over either voice radio when held to the
Forward (VHF transmit) or Aft (UHF transmit) positions, in a Push-To-Talk (PTT) manner.
                                                                                        UHF VHF Transmit Switch (4-way)

                         Transmit over VHF Radio



         Datalink functions                Datalink functions



                         Transmit over UHF Radio


         Continuous press


In DCS World, when sending commands or requests to other units, either switch position must be utilized to open
the Call Radio menu for the correct radio. When communicating with the ground crew, you may use the
intercom system to issue requests using the Communication menu command. The corresponding keyboard
commands for accessing these menus are below.
     •        Transmit switch – VHF (call radio menu) [RCtrl + \]
     •        Transmit switch – UHF (call radio menu) [RAlt + \]
     •        Communication menu [\]
As an example, if your wingmen are tuned to a VHF frequency, you must also be tuned to the same frequency
on your VHF radio and open the VHF call radio menu to issue them commands. This is the more realistic mode
and requires you to know the correct frequencies for each unit you intend on communicating with during your
mission, such as wingmen, AWACS, refueling tankers, or ground units. Each radio call will need to be transmitted
over the correct radio while tuned to the correct frequency.
However, for more casual players that do not desire as in-depth of a radio management simulation, there is an
option available under the DCS Options GAMEPLAY Tab labeled “Easy Communication”.


Easy Communication Option
The radio communications menu is accessed by pressing the backslash key [\] (for US keyboards; other language
keyboards may vary). A list of radio recipients will be displayed along with the function key ([F1] through [F10])
required to issue the corresponding command or view a sub-menu command list.
When the radio communications menu is displayed, recipients are color-coded as follows:
     •        Recipients on a frequency to which at least one of the player’s radios is tuned are colored white.
     •        Recipients on a frequency to which at least one of the player’s radios may be tuned, but are not
              currently on the same frequency as the player’s radio(s), are colored gray.
     •        Recipients that cannot be contacted due to range or line-of-sight limitations, such as terrain
              obstructions or are over the horizon, are colored black.
The frequency that each recipient is monitoring will be displayed next to recipient entry. When a recipient is
selected, the appropriate radio will be automatically tuned to the required frequency in order to communicate
with that recipient.
TACTICAL EMPLOYMENT
 TACTICAL EMPLOYMENT
F-16C TACTICAL EMPLOYMENT OVERVIEW
The F-16C is an all-weather, multi-role, tactical fighter aircraft. The F-16C is capable of a variety of air-to-air and
air-to-surface missions such as Combat Air Patrol (CAP), Offensive Counter-Air (OCA), Defensive Counter-Air
(DCA), Air Interdiction (AI), and Close Air Support (CAS). However, the most notable of the F-16C’s missions has
been to replace the F-4G as the U.S. Air Force’s dedicated “Wild Weasel” platform for performing SEAD
(Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses).




The F-16C’s cockpit layout and fire control avionics are optimized for operation by a single-pilot, presenting the
most important information on the HUD and forward instrument panel, with numerous fire control and weapon
functions accessible via buttons and switches mounted directly onto the side stick and throttle grip. This cockpit
design allows the pilot to remain focused outside as much as possible, taking advantage of the all-around visibility
afforded by the F-16’s bubble canopy. The F-16’s mission systems and HUD symbology facilitate accurate low-
level strikes against ground targets, even when its navigation system has degraded in position quality. The
avionics and sensors are equally capable of pinpoint strikes against pre-planned targets or against targets of
opportunity that have been visually identified by the pilot.
Regardless of the type of mission the F-16 is performing, pre-mission planning is the most important part of any
successful combat mission, particularly when performing an air-to-surface strike on a target protected by hostile
air defense systems. As in the case with other military aircraft, factors such as terrain, weather, and threat
locations should be considered when planning ingress and egress routes; and the speeds and altitudes to be
flown. Routes and altitudes should be selected to maximize survivability, reduce the probability of detection by
threat weapon systems, and, when necessary to fly through the Weapon Engagement Zone (WEZ) of enemy air
defense systems, minimize the time spent within the WEZ of such systems.
In addition, the desired weapon effects against the assigned target(s) will typically determine which munition
types will be appropriate for the mission, which in turn may determine the nature of the ingress routes and the
speed and altitudes that are utilized when conducting the attack itself. Conversely, the defenses surrounding the
target may preclude the use of specific routing and/or munition types, which may drive the planning process to
consider alternative routes and altitudes in order to achieve the same weapon effects.
Air-to-Air Missions
Air-to-air missions rely on effective
communication and coordination between
flight members, situational awareness,
and a firm understanding of Air Combat
Maneuvers (ACM). Regardless of the
specific mission that is being performed,
the flight leader must retain the initiative
by anticipating what the enemy may do
while simultaneously maneuvering the
flight in a manner to gain and maintain an
advantage in position and energy state.
Air-to-air engagements are divided into
two distinct phases of combat: Beyond
Visual Range (BVR) and Within Visual
Range (WVR).

            Within Visual Range   Beyond Visual Range




                   M61 20mm cannon
                   AIM-9 infrared-guided missile
                   AIM-120 active radar-guided missile

                                          Air-to-Air Engagement Ranges



Beyond Visual Range (BVR) Combat
BVR is the phase in which the majority of modern-day air-to-air engagements begin. The key to BVR combat is
termed as “first look, first shot, first kill”, which is the ability to detect, shoot, and kill hostile air threats before
they can achieve the same opportunity. This is dependent on detecting the presence of enemy aircraft as soon
as possible, positioning the flight in a manner in which long-range air-to-air missiles may be employed against
the enemy aircraft at the furthest range that is tactically feasible, and successfully defeating any counterattack
that is taken against the flight.
Detection
BVR combat is typically reliant on the use of radar for detection, tracking, and missile guidance against enemy
aircraft at long range. However, in some cases electro-optical sensors such as telescopic cameras or infrared
search & track (IRST) systems may be utilized. In addition, electronic datalinks may also be incorporated to
enhance the collective situational awareness of each flight member by sharing sensor data across networks of
multiple aircraft.
Like most sensors, radar has some key advantages and disadvantages. Radar can detect the presence of aircraft
at ranges well beyond that which the pilot can visually see with the unaided eye, and can calculate the precise
position, altitude, and velocity of detected aircraft. Unfortunately, radar alone cannot determine the allegiance of
an aircraft, which is referred to using the brevity term “bogey” to describe an aircraft of unknown identity or
affiliation. However, in the case of the F-16C, the APG-68 Fire Control Radar (FCR) incorporates a function known
as Non-Cooperative Target Recognition (NCTR) to identify the specific type of aircraft, along with the APX-113
Advanced Identification-Friend-or-Foe (AIFF) interrogator to determine if a detected aircraft is potentially hostile,
which is referred to using the brevity term “bandit”. Further, the APG-68 FCR is limited to the forward sector only,
and requires several moments to mechanically scan the airspace within its entire scan volume.
When operating as a flight, radar coverage may
be allocated to each flight member using azimuth
and/or altitude sectors, which allows each flight
member to scan a smaller volume of airspace.                                             Each flight member scans half
Since each flight member is responsible for a                                             the area, doubling the scan
                                                                        60° Azimuth           rate of the airspace
smaller scan volume, each sector is scanned                              4-Bar Scan
faster and more frequently, increasing the                               -20° offset
probability of detection within the total volume of
radar coverage amongst the flight. Increasing
the scan rate of a given volume of airspace               50° to either side of course
                                                          20° of overlap in the center
increases the likelihood of detecting enemy               100° of combined coverage
aircraft at further range, allowing the flight to
decide on a course of action earlier and act
accordingly. This can be especially advantageous                        60° Azimuth
                                                                         4-Bar Scan
when performing a fighter sweep across a large                          +20° offset       Enemy aircraft are detected
area of airspace.                                                                          sooner and with a greater
                                                                                         probability at increased range
Alternatively, when patrolling an area where the
flight must maintain a position within an assigned
area, such as a combat air patrol orbit, it will
often be necessary to split the flight to opposing
                                                                              Radar Sector Delineation
sides of the patrol orbit, with the orbit itself
aligned with the anticipated vector from which
enemy aircraft are expected to approach.
In such a situation in which the flight consists of two aircraft, at least one aircraft will maintain their radar oriented
toward the anticipated threat vector while the other is on the opposite side of the orbit. This sequence allows the
anticipated threat vector to be monitored by at least one flight member’s radar, with only brief periods of time in
which the threat vector is not being monitored as both aircraft are in a turn. When performed with a flight of
four, each 2-ship element may be staggered to permit uninterrupted radar coverage.




                             Orbit aligned with                                                      Anticipated
                               threat vector                                                        threat vector




                                              At least one radar is covering the
                                               threat vector most of the time




                                     Patrol orbit aligned with threat vector

Even when supported by AWACS aircraft such as the E-3, the flight should not solely rely on the surveillance
information provided by the datalink network for detection of enemy aircraft. AWACS or other contributing sensors
on the datalink network may not have the same line-of-sight or proximity to potential threats compared to one’s
own flight. Rather, datalink information should be utilized to augment the collective situational awareness of the
flight members or provide early warning beyond the range of the flight’s own sensors.
Committing to the Engagement
Once aircraft are detected and determined to be hostile (“bandits”) and the Flight Lead has decided to commit
to an engagement, the flight must orient themselves appropriately to ensure they are in the most advantageous
position and energy state for the impending engagement. The flight should align their course with an appropriate
intercept vector that will allow them to engage the bandits from the desired aspect angle for the given tactical
situation. If intending to engage the bandits from an aspect angle that will guarantee the maximum kinematic
performance of their missiles, the flight should align to an approximate intercept vector that will place the bandit
aircraft directly in front of the flight when the onboard missiles would achieve their maximum range, thereby
minimizing the course corrections the missiles must perform after launch.
                                                                                Maximum kinematic             Maximum launch
                                                                                 range of missile             range based on
                                                                                                             closure rate/angle




                                                                                 Missile     Interception


                                                                                  Bandit positions
   Flight positions       Flight positions                                       at missile intercept
  at missile launch     at missile intercept


                                                                                                              Bandit positions
                                                                                                              at missile launch


                               Intercept vector for maximum missile performance

The Flight Lead should consider the formation of the flight itself, in that each flight member’s position, spacing,
and altitude relative to one other is properly set for a BVR engagement. When entering a BVR engagement, the
Flight Lead should select a formation that best suits the tactical situation, which maximizes firepower where it is
needed without sacrificing the ability for the flight to provide mutual support or maneuver defensively if necessary.
The Flight Lead should also consider the flight’s altitude and velocity. Launching a missile from higher altitudes
and higher speeds will increase the kinematic performance of the missile. Conversely, launching a missile at lower
altitudes where the air density is higher will result in increased drag on the missile, and launching from a lower
speed will result in the missile attaining less total kinetic energy before its rocket motor is depleted.




                                  Launch aircraft flying at higher speeds                                     Kinematic range
                                    and/or higher altitudes increases                                       when launched from
                                    kinematic performance of missile                                        high altitude/velocity
                                                                              Kinematic range
                                                                            when launched from
                                                                            low altitude/velocity




                                               Missile kinematic range at launch

By positioning the flight at higher altitudes and increasing velocity prior to launch, enemy aircraft may be engaged
from a greater distance. However, inducing a radar look-down situation may also have a negative effect on the
flight’s own radar performance, depending on the bandit’s range, aspect, relative altitude, and radar cross section
(RCS). Additionally, a higher closure rate will compress the engagement timeline, forcing the Flight Lead to make
decisions faster and requiring the flight as a whole to react quickly to an evolving tactical situation.
Engagement
The tactics and techniques of conducting a BVR engagement will vary greatly depending on the tactical situation,
the composition of the flight, the weapons load amongst the flight members, and the type of enemy aircraft the
flight is expecting to encounter, especially with consideration to the sensor and weapon capabilities of the enemy
aircraft. In the case of the F-16C, the only type of weapon that may be employed in a beyond visual range
engagement is the AIM-120, which is an active radar-homing missile that permits simultaneous engagements of
multiple targets by autonomously tracking its target using an onboard active radar seeker for terminal guidance.
As mentioned above, the kinematic performance of the missile will be
affected by the launching aircraft’s altitude and velocity at the moment
of launch. However, the maximum range at which a target may be
engaged will be determined by a combination of the missile’s kinematic
performance and the aspect angle and closure rate of the targeted
aircraft relative to the launching aircraft. If the targeted aircraft is         “Hot”
approaching from a head-on or “hot” aspect, the target may be engaged                               “Flanking”
at a greater range. If the targeted aircraft is flying away in a tail-on or
“cold” aspect, the target must be engaged from a closer range.
                                                                                                                        “Cold”
Further, if the targeted aircraft is approaching from a “hot” aspect but
is flying at a low speed, the target must be engaged from a closer range
due to the reduced closure rate with the missile. If the targeted aircraft
is flying away in a “cold” aspect but is flying at a low speed, the target
may be engaged at a greater range due to the increased closure rate
the missile will have to catch up to the target. These two factors, aspect
angle and relative closure rate, will determine the maximum launch                              Aspect Angle
range of a missile against a target, also known as RMAX, for a given set
of launch conditions.
In the figure below, each bandit is flying at the same velocity, and each missile that is fired is being launched
under identical conditions with the same kinematic range. However, due to the aspect angle of each bandit, the
range (RMAX) at which each target can actually be engaged will be drastically different solely based on the aspect
angle. In the same scenario, if the “Hot” bandit were to increase velocity, the RMAX would also increase; but if the
“Cold” bandit were to increase velocity, the RMAX would inversely decrease.
                                                                       Maximum kinematic
                               Missile fired against                    range of missile
                                   “hot” bandit
                                                                                                     “Hot” bandit


                               Missile fired against
                                  “cold” bandit
                                                       “Cold” bandit


                               Missile fired against
                                “flanking” bandit

                                              RMAX against                                  RMAX against     RMAX against
                                              “cold” bandit                              “flanking” bandit   “hot” bandit

                       Missile maximum launch range (RMAX) based on aspect angle

In addition, if the bandit aircraft were to defensively maneuver after the missile is launched, the missile would be
required to expend kinematic energy to adjust its course to a new intercept vector. If a bandit is flying directly
toward the flight (“hot” aspect) and is engaged at the absolute maximum range, the missile may be kinematically
defeated if the bandit simply changes its aspect. Therefore, the Flight Lead must anticipate the possibility of such
an action when considering engagement tactics.
Conversely, aspect angle may be exploited by the ownship after a missile is launched at the enemy aircraft. After
missile launch, the ownship may turn, or “crank”, to one side until the ownship radar is near its antenna gimbal
limit. This maneuver will reduce the ownship’s closure rate with the bandit, allowing the ownship to prolong
standoff range from the bandit and potentially complicate the employment of enemy missiles against the ownship,
especially if the bandit aircraft is equipped with missiles that have a shorter range compared to the AIM-120.
It is worth noting that if the targeted bandit is simultaneously attempting to engage the ownship, performing a
crank maneuver may cause the bandit to adjust course as well. This may reduce the kinematic range of the
ownship’s missile while in flight as it will need to alter its course to maintain an optimal intercept vector on the
targeted bandit. If the ownship’s missile was launched at the absolute maximum kinematic range, the crank
maneuver itself could reduce the probability of a successful engagement, depending on the relative closure rates.



                                                                                       Bandit aircraft begins
                                   Bandit may alter                                    defensive maneuvers
                                intercept course after                                 when/if missile’s radar
                                  “crank” maneuver                                      seeker is detected




                                                                Missile’s onboard
                                                              radar seeker activates
                                                                                              Pilot may continue toward
                                                                                                the bandit to press the
                                                                                                    attack or pursue


                                                                                             Decision Point

                                                     Launching aircraft “cranks”
                                                      left or right until radar is
                                                       at gimbal limits (±60°)
         Active radar-homing
           missile launched
                                                Crank Maneuver                          Pilot may turn away from the
                                                                                          bandit to maintain/regain
                                                                                       standoff at beyond visual range




                                          Post-launch “Crank” maneuver

Once the missile’s onboard radar seeker activates to begin terminal tracking of the enemy aircraft, the radar
signals emitted from the missile seeker itself may alert the targeted bandit to the attack, resulting in the bandit
aircraft initiating defensive maneuvers and/or employing countermeasures in an attempt to defeat the missile. At
this point in the engagement, the Flight Lead must make a decision as to how to continue the engagement.
The launching aircraft could turn toward the bandit to be in a position to continue with the engagement in the
event the bandit survives the missile encounter. Alternatively, the launching aircraft could turn away from the
bandit to maintain standoff and keep the engagement at beyond visual range. If the wingman or second element
of the flight were following at a staggered distance behind the launching aircraft, the remainder of the flight could
continue the engagement while the launching aircraft turns away to maintain standoff.
Turning away from the bandit may also ensure a kinematic advantage against any missiles that may have been
launched by the bandit aircraft before it was forced to initiate defensive maneuvers. Although the bandit will
likely be forced to maneuver in a manner that results in losing a radar lock on the ownship, thereby defeating
any semi-active radar-homing missiles that were launched by the bandit, any active radar-homing missiles
launched by the bandit may have already begun terminal guidance. If that is the case, the enemy active radar-
homing missile(s) will now be at a kinematic disadvantage in a tail chase.
In some instances, it may be advantageous to launch a long-range
radar-guided missile even if the bandit aircraft is not yet within
maximum launch range, with the intent to force the bandit into
defensive maneuvers or break up a formation of several enemy aircraft.
By launching in advance, the radar signals emitted from an incoming
active radar-homing missile in terminal guidance may prompt the
bandit to initiate defensive maneuvers in an attempt to defeat the                                Bandit is forced into
missile. This may disrupt an impending attack from the bandit                                     defensive maneuvers
(especially critical if the bandit aircraft is equipped with missiles that                       when missile’s onboard
                                                                                                 radar seeker activates
have superior engagement range over the AIM-120), giving the
ownship additional time to reduce the range to the extent that a follow-
up missile may be launched with a higher probability of successful
interception. In addition, if multiple bandit aircraft were operating
together in a formation, forcing one or more bandits to defensively
maneuver may allow the flight to regain the initiative, prevent the
bandits from mutually supporting one another for a brief time, or more
easily target individual enemy aircraft.
If forced to perform defensive maneuvers, the bandit will also likely             Second missile is
need to expend significant energy by sacrificing airspeed and/or               launched when bandit
                                                                               enters maximum range
altitude during the maneuvers themselves. This may grant a temporary
kinematic advantage to the ownship flight while imposing a kinematic
disadvantage on the bandit. However, as noted before, although an
altitude advantage does provide a kinematic advantage during a BVR
missile engagement, inducing a radar look-down situation may also
have a negative effect on the flight’s own radar performance,
depending on the bandit aircraft’s range, aspect, relative altitude, and
radar cross section (RCS).                                                         First missile launched
                                                                                     while bandit is still
It is also worth noting that, depending on the total quantity of long-            beyond maximum range
range missiles that are available within the flight, deliberately
expending missiles in an opening engagement with a low probability of                 Long-range offensive
success may not be advisable. If the number of opposing bandit aircraft                missile engagement
meets or exceeds one’s own flight, the Flight Lead should consider the
tactical implications of expending missiles in such a manner.
Defense
When under attack by long-range missiles launched from enemy aircraft, defensive countermeasures may be
employed to either electronically defeat the guidance of the missile or the kinematically defeat the missile itself.
In the case of the former, the missile guidance may be disrupted by expending chaff cartridges to degrade the
tracking solution of the bandit aircraft’s radar (in the case of semi-active radar-homing missiles) or the missile’s
onboard radar seeker (in the case of active radar-homing missiles); or electronic “jamming” emissions against
the radar may be employed. However, such defensive measures may be negated if the bandit’s radar or the
missile itself possesses counter-countermeasures in the form of chaff rejection algorithms or “home-on-jam”
capabilities, especially when facing an enemy with modern, sophisticated aircraft or weapons.
In the case of the latter, the missile may be kinematically defeated by forcing the missile to expend energy by
altering its course and/or descending to lower altitudes to increase the total drag acting against the missile body
and control surfaces. Once a missile’s rocket motor is expended, it must rely on its remaining kinetic energy for
maneuvering. If the missile needs to change its flight path, it must use its control surfaces to alter the angle-of-
attack against its external airfoils and missile body. Like any airfoil, increasing the angle-of-attack of the airflow
against the airfoil itself will also increase the aerodynamic drag acting upon it. Therefore, the more maneuvers a
missile must perform, the more drag will be incurred, reducing the missile’s kinetic energy. When launched from
higher altitudes, or if the missile performs a post-launch “loft” maneuver, the missile can leverage the force of
gravity to convert its potential energy (i.e., altitude) to kinetic energy, thereby gaining additional kinematic range.
However, unlike a missile, an aircraft has the advantage of an onboard engine, or engines, that allows it to
maintain or gain energy for maneuvers. This grants an aircraft kinematic sustainment that can be used to delay
or eventually defeat an enemy missile, which is otherwise limited to a finite amount of kinematic energy.
If the targeted aircraft aggressively alters its course, the missile must recalculate a new intercept trajectory and
then alter its own course accordingly. This maneuver incurs drag which causes the missile to lose kinetic energy.
If the targeted aircraft alters its course again, the missile must once more expend kinetic energy to alter its own
course to maintain an intercept. Contrarily, the targeted aircraft may use engine thrust to maintain its kinetic
energy during moderate maneuvers or regain kinetic energy following aggressive maneuvers. This means that
for every defensive maneuver the aircraft performs in which it drastically alters its flight path, the total kinematic
advantage the missile may have over the aircraft is incrementally reduced.




                                          Missile expends more energy
                                           to adjust intercept course

                                                                                  Missile has expended most of its
           Missile expends energy to                                               energy after several significant
            adjust intercept course                                              adjustments to its intercept course




                Defensive maneuver
               alters intercept aspect



                                         A reversal maneuver alters
                                           intercept aspect again


                                                        If engaged at maximum range,
                                                                                                     Another reversal maneuver
                                                         simply turning away to outrun
                                                                                                     alters intercept aspect again
                                                           the missile may be possible


                             Defensive maneuvers against long-range missile attack

If the enemy missile is forced to expend enough kinetic energy, the missile will eventually slow down to the point
it will not be able to achieve a successful intercept, or even maintain stable flight, and will simply fall from the
sky. When engaged from long range, only a few defensive maneuvers by the targeted aircraft have the potential
to reduce the missile’s kinematic range to an extent that it cannot achieve an intercept, and the targeted aircraft
simply needs to turn away from the missile, resulting in a tail chase that the missile cannot overcome.
Another method of reducing a missile’s kinematic range is by decreasing altitude. By descending into thicker
regions of the atmosphere, the increased air density will increase the total drag acting upon the missile, further
reducing its kinetic energy. This may also induce a radar look-down situation which may degrade the radar
tracking solution from the bandit aircraft or an active radar-homing missile’s onboard radar seeker. However, it
is worth noting that this will also grant the bandit an altitude advantage for subsequent attacks, so the necessity
of such a defensive tactic must be weighed between defeating the immediate threat posed by a launched missile
versus the potential threat posed by a subsequent attack.
Within Visual Range (WVR) Combat
WVR combat is one of the most challenging environments a fighter pilot may encounter and requires significant
skill and proficiency. Close range aerial combat is very dynamic, and mistakes or miscalculations can result in
lethal consequences within seconds. If BVR is a game of chess, WVR is hand-to-hand combat in which offense
and defense must be performed simultaneously, instantly, and instinctively, in which either pilot may find
themselves gaining or losing the upper hand at any moment.
Many advantages provided by sophisticated sensors and weapons – or even stealth – are negated by the fact
that close-range aerial combat places one’s own aircraft in a position to be engaged by any of the enemy aircraft’s
weapon systems, such as highly-maneuverable short-range air-to-air missiles, and compresses the reaction time
to deploy countermeasures or defensive maneuvering to nearly zero. Even when facing an enemy aircraft with
inferior maneuverability and a lower thrust-to-weight ratio, granting an enemy pilot an opportunity to engage
one’s own aircraft in a maneuvering “dogfight” is a tactical risk that should be avoided if possible.
During air-to-air combat within visual range, fighter pilots must employ elements of BFM and ACM.
Basic Fighter Maneuvers (BFM). BFM is characterized as maneuvering one’s own aircraft to exploit positional
and attack geometry in order to place the enemy aircraft, or “bandit”, within the weapons envelope of one’s own
aircraft while simultaneously preventing the bandit from doing the same thing.
Air Combat Maneuvers (ACM). ACM is characterized as two friendly aircraft employing BFM while working as
a team to engage or avoid one or more bandits; or to extend and escape from WVR combat altogether, if possible.
Positional Geometry
The position and orientation of one’s own aircraft in relation to the bandit can be expressed using the factors of
aspect angle, angle-off, and range.
•    Aspect Angle. The position of the attacking aircraft in relation to the targeted aircraft’s tail, where an
     aspect angle of 0° would mean the attacking aircraft is directly behind the target and 180° would mean the
     attacking aircraft is directly in front of the target. In practical terms, as the aspect angle increases, the
     relative closure rate will tend to increase and the time within which a bandit will be within the weapons
     envelope of the ownship will decrease.
•    Angle-Off. The relative heading of each aircraft, where an angle-off of 0° would mean the nose of each
     aircraft are pointed in the same direction and 180° would mean the nose of each aircraft is pointed in
     opposing directions. In practical terms, as the angle-off increases, the flight paths of the aircraft will diverge
     and the amount of aiming “lead” that will be required to employ weapons against a bandit will increase,
     which will complicate a gun engagement and may reduce the probability of a successful missile engagement.
•    Range. The straight-line distance between each aircraft. In practical terms, as the range increases, the
     time within which a bandit will be within the weapons envelope of the ownship will increase, which may
     improve the probability of a successful missile engagement but will greatly complicate a gun engagement
     due to the increased time-of-flight and trajectory compensation that must be performed.




                                                       160° Aspect Angle



                                     30° Angle-Off


                                             10° Aspect Angle
                                                                                 145° Angle-Off




                                                Positional Geometry
Attack Geometry
The flight path that is utilized to gain more favorable positional geometry, known as the pursuit course, is
determined by either the ownship’s lift vector or the ownship’s nose position relative to the bandit, depending on
whether the ownship is within the same plane of turn as the bandit.




                                    Lift vector in same          Lift vector in different
                                        plane of turn                 plane of turn




                                 Lift vector relative to bandit’s plane of turn

The plane of turn can be thought of as a 2-dimensional disk around which an aircraft maneuvers. As any aircraft
maneuvers within a 3-dimensional volume of airspace, the flight path is determined by the forces of aerodynamic
lift and gravity. When maneuvering in a positive-G turn, the pilot directs the lift vector using roll and pulls aft on
the stick to induce a positive pitch motion, which alters the flight path using aerodynamic lift.
When maneuvering in a different plane of turn compared to the bandit, the pursuit course is determined by the
lift vector of the ownship. In this situation, the lift vector diverges from the bandit’s plane of turn and the ownship
is maneuvered into a 3-dimensional pursuit course in relation to the bandit’s plane of turn. This can be particularly
useful if intending to use gravity to maintain or regain kinetic energy, to lengthen one’s own flight path away
from the bandit to extend the range before employing a weapon, or to tighten one’s own turning radius to attain
an optimum position for employing a weapon.




                             Pursuit course outside the bandit’s plane of turn
When maneuvering within the same plane of turn as the bandit, the pursuit course is determined by the nose
position of the ownship relative to the bandit itself.
•    Lag Pursuit. If the nose position is behind the bandit, the ownship is in a lag pursuit course. In practical
     terms, a lag pursuit may be employed if the aspect angle is too high and the ownship does not have enough
     kinetic energy to maintain the required turn rate to keep the nose on the bandit, or the ownship requires
     more turning room than what the current range or closure rate allows.
•    Pure Pursuit. If the nose position is on the bandit itself, the ownship is in a pure pursuit course. In practical
     terms, a pure pursuit may be employed if the aspect angle is low enough and the ownship has enough
     kinetic energy to maintain the required turn rate and within the required turning room to keep the nose on
     the bandit. A pure pursuit can be useful in achieving an optimum position for weapons employment at low
     aspect angles.
•    Lead Pursuit. If the nose position is ahead of the bandit, the ownship is in a lead pursuit course. In practical
     terms, a lead pursuit may be employed to reduce the ownship’s turning radius within the bandit’s turn circle,
     or to increase the closure rate and/or reduce the range to the bandit. However, this requires that the
     ownship has enough kinetic energy and/or engine thrust to maintain the required turn rate and within the
     required turning room to keep the nose ahead of the bandit. A lead pursuit can be useful in achieving an
     optimum position for weapons employment at higher aspect angles, particularly if employing the gun, but
     doing so with a positive closure rate will likely require a constantly increasing turn rate that eventually results
     in being forced into a lag pursuit outside the bandit’s turn radius.
             Lag Pursuit                           Pure Pursuit                         Lead Pursuit




                              Pursuit course within the bandit’s plane of turn

Although a bandit may be engaged from outside the bandit’s plane of turn, the attack geometry will be more
complex and attaining the required targeting solution will likely be fleeting in nature. Particularly when engaging
a bandit with the gun, entering the same plane of turn as the bandit will simplify the targeting solution required
to achieve hits on the bandit.
Conversely, when attempting to avoid a gun attack from a bandit, significantly changing one’s own plane of turn
will also complicate the bandit’s targeting solution, forcing the bandit to adjust nose position and lift vector before
an acceptable targeting solution for a gun attack can be attained.
Turn Rate versus Turn Radius
When employing attack geometry to achieve more
favorable positional geometry for weapons
employment, the turn performance of each opposing
aircraft must be considered, which are expressed by
the factors of turn rate and turn radius.
•          Turn Rate. The time that is required for an
           aircraft to alter its flight path to a new direction
           is its turn rate. In practical terms, this is an
           expression of how quickly the aircraft can turn
           to a point the nose in a different direction.
•          Turn Radius. The space that is required for an
           aircraft to alter its flight to a new direction is its
                                                                                                 Turn Rate
           turn radius. In practical terms, this is an
           expression of how tightly the aircraft can turn
           to point the nose in a different direction.
Both factors must be considered together, in that
achieving the maximum turn rate for a given speed
may not result in the minimum turn radius, nor will
the minimum turn radius for a given speed result in
the maximum turn rate. The pilot must consider
what is more desirable throughout BFM: being able
to turn the aircraft within a metric of time or being
able to turn the aircraft within a metric of physical                            Turn Rate vs Turn Radius
distance.
Airspeed plays an important role in determining an aircraft’s turn performance. Since an aircraft must utilize
aerodynamic lift to alter its flight path, and aerodynamic lift is generated by air flowing across an airfoil, sufficient
airspeed must be attained to achieve the desired turn performance. As an aircraft performs a positive pitch motion
to increase the angle-of-attack (AoA, or “alpha”), the aerodynamic lift generated by the airfoils will increase,
tightening the turn. However, increasing the AoA will also increase aerodynamic drag, which will cause the aircraft
to slow down. This is overcome by increasing engine thrust during the turn; however, if the AoA is high enough
in that more drag is produced than the thrust from the engine can overcome, the aircraft will slow down.
At higher speeds, a given turn rate will result in higher G-forces. Once the aircraft reaches the maximum allowable
G-force that can be sustained, the turn radius will increase with airspeed. Conversely, if airspeed decreases, the
turn radius will also decrease. However, if the airspeed continues to decrease, so too will the aerodynamic lift
and the turn performance of the aircraft. Once the airspeed drops below a certain threshold, the aircraft will no
longer be capable of achieving the maximum allowable G-force. This threshold, at which the turn performance is
at its highest, is known as “corner velocity”.
                                             Turning            It is worth mentioning that some aircraft are designed with
           Turning                   Lift     Force             “high-alpha” (high angle-of-attack) maneuverability in mind.
            Force
    Lift
                                                                However, as already mentioned, increasing AoA will also
                                                                increase aerodynamic drag, and “high-alpha” conditions will
                                                                generate aerodynamic drag to an extent that such maneuvers
                                                                can only be maintained for a few moments before the energy
Drag                              Drag                          state of the aircraft is depleted. Although high-alpha
                                                                maneuverability in itself permits a significantly higher turn
                                                                rate, allowing the pilot to bring the nose to bear on an enemy
             Drag at high Angles-of-Attack                      aircraft for a “snapshot” engagement opportunity, doing so
                                                                will place the aircraft at an energy disadvantage.
The Flight Control System (FLCS) limits the F-16 turn performance based on angle-of-attack (AoA) and G-force
in such a manner that the F-16 does not have a specific corner velocity, but rather a “corner plateau” between
330 and 440 knots airspeed. This also means that the F-16 is not capable of employing high-alpha maneuvers.
•    At higher airspeeds, the limiting factor of the F-16’s turn performance is G-force. The turn rate and turn
     radius will increase and decrease accordingly with airspeed, based on a maximum G-force of 9 G. Once the
     airspeed drops below approximately 440 KCAS (knots, calibrated airspeed), the limiting factor of the F-16’s
     turn performance becomes angle-of-attack.
•    As the airspeed is reduced from approximately 440 to 330 KCAS (the “corner plateau”), the turn radius will
     decrease slightly while the turn rate will increase.
•    As the airspeed is reduced below approximately 330 KCAS, the turn radius will remain roughly the same,
     but the turn rate will decrease.
                                                                        Turn rate limited by max G




                            Turn rate limited by max G




                                                                                  Turn rate limited by AoA




                  Turn rate limited by max G

                                                                         Turn rate limited by AoA



                                                     Turn Performance

It is worth noting that turn performance is greatly affected by gross weight and air density. At higher gross
weights, greater AoA will be necessary to generate the required aerodynamic lift to redirect the aircraft’s inertia
and alter the flight path. Accordingly, the increased AoA will generate more aerodynamic drag, requiring more
thrust from the engine to maintain the energy state of the aircraft. At higher altitudes and/or temperatures, lower
air densities will result in reduced aerodynamic lift, which will likewise require additional AoA.
As a result, the turn performance of the aircraft will decrease at higher altitudes and gross weights. Under such
conditions, the turn rate that may be sustained at maximum engine thrust may not reach the maximum G or
maximum AoA limits of the aircraft. The pilot may still elect to utilize the full turn performance of the aircraft in
this case, knowing that the current energy state cannot be maintained due to insufficient engine thrust, but doing
so should be done with consideration to the tactical situation. For example, a more aggressive turn may be
momentarily employed to achieve an optimum position for weapons employment, or to temporarily deny a bandit
the same opportunity, with the knowledge that doing so will expend energy and cause the airspeed to decrease.
However, such an action may prove tactically advantageous in that moment if the energy can be recovered.
The force of gravity itself will also affect the turning radius of the aircraft when the plane of turn is not parallel
with the surface of the Earth. When ascending and the flight path passes the vertical, gravity will pull the aircraft
in the same direction as the lift vector. This augments the aerodynamic lift with which the aircraft is turning,
tightening the turn itself and reducing the turn radius.
When descending and the flight path passes the vertical, gravity will pull the aircraft in the opposite direction
from the lift vector. This counteracts the aerodynamic lift with which the aircraft is turning, extending the turn
itself and increasing the turn radius.



                             Gravity tightens
                               turn radius

                                                                                      Gravity augments
                                                                                       kinetic energy




                                                Gravity bleeds
                                                kinetic energy                                     Gravity extends
                                                                                                     turn radius



                                                Vertical Turn Radius

In addition, altitude may be traded for airspeed, or vice versa. As altitude is potential energy and airspeed is
kinetic energy, one may be exchanged for the other during aerial maneuvers, as necessary.
If the pilot must perform a turn for which the engine thrust cannot maintain the current airspeed, the aircraft will
slow down. However, if sufficient altitude (potential energy) is available and the pilot incorporates a descent
throughout the turn, the force of gravity may be used to augment the engine thrust to maintain or regain airspeed
(kinetic energy). Thus, potential energy is traded for kinetic energy.
Alternatively, if the pilot must gain altitude and the engine thrust cannot maintain the current airspeed throughout
the ascent, the aircraft will slow down. However, if sufficient airspeed (kinetic energy) is available, aircraft inertia
may be used to augment the engine thrust to gain altitude (potential energy). Thus, kinetic energy is traded for
potential energy.
Entering the Merge
The tactics and techniques of conducting a close-range WVR engagement will vary greatly depending on the
tactical situation, the positional geometry as the flight merges with an enemy aircraft, and the type of aircraft
with which the flight has merged, especially with consideration to the maneuverability and weapon capabilities
of the enemy aircraft. Of particular note are whether the enemy aircraft’s strengths lie within its turn performance,
its thrust-to-weight ratio, and whether it has the capability to perform “high-alpha” maneuvers or employ high-
off-boresight missiles. These factors should drive how the enemy aircraft are engaged in close combat, in order
to leverage the strengths of one’s own aircraft while exploiting the weaknesses of the enemy aircraft.
Once two opposing aircraft have entered into close-
range BFM combat, this is referred to as becoming
“merged”. Prior to the merge itself, it is important to                                                      1
develop a plan for how to maneuver, attack, defend
against, and ultimately defeat the bandit with respect
to one’s own flight and the capabilities and tactics that
will likely be employed by the enemy aircraft. The most
important thing to remember is to avoid losing sight of
the bandit. In many cases during close-range combat,
the bandit will be outside of the FCR gimbal limits, any
position updates of an enemy aircraft received via
datalink will not be received fast enough, and the radar
warning receiver cannot be relied upon to warn of an
impending attack from IR-guided missiles or guns.
                                                                                        Bandit
                                                                  1                   Turn Circle
When entering into a merge, performing a turn into the                                                      2
bandit before actually passing the bandit aircraft, which
is known as a lead turn, can be used to reduce the                    Bandit has positional advantage
angle-off and aspect angle. However, it is likely the                 if ownship does not turn outside
                                                                           the bandit’s turn circle
bandit will also attempt a lead turn against the ownship.
In this situation, the opposing aircraft will enter what is
known as a “two-circle fight”, in which the turn circle of
each aircraft is offset from one another.
A two-circle fight may also occur if the ownship is in an
offensive position behind the bandit, but at a range that
permits the bandit to perform a turn that sufficiently
increases the aspect angle and angle-off before the
ownship can enter the bandit’s turn circle. If the                                         Ownship
ownship does not turn into the bandit and enter a two-                2
                                                                                          Turn Circle
circle fight, the only option to avoid granting the bandit
positional advantage would be to accelerate and extend
the range to deny the bandit an opportunity to employ
a weapon against the ownship from a low aspect angle.
As the two aircraft pass, a high aspect missile shot may
be taken if equipped with an appropriate missile type.
However, one should be prepared for the bandit to
attempt the same, especially if the bandit is equipped
with all-aspect IR-guided missiles. Particularly when
positioned on opposing sides of the respective circles,
one should be prepared for brief opportunities to
employ missiles, especially if equipped with high-off-                1
boresight missiles such as the AIM-9X. Likewise, if the
bandit is equipped with high-off-boresight missiles as
well, or is capable of high-alpha maneuvers, one should
                                                                             BFM Two-Circle Fight
be prepared for the bandit to attempt the same.
                                                                  When the ownship is in an offensive position behind the
                                 2                                bandit and at a range that permits the ownship to enter
                                                                  the bandit’s turn circle before the bandit can react, the
                                                                  ownship may gain positional advantage with favorable
                                                                  aspect angle and angle-off. In this situation, the opposing
                           Ownship has positional                 aircraft will enter what is known as a “one-circle fight”, in
                          advantage if able to turn
                        inside the bandit’s turn circle           which the turn circle of each aircraft is essentially
                                                                  coincident with one another with minimal offset.
                          Bandit                                  If the ownship is able to enter a one-circle fight, the
      1                 Turn Circle
                                                                  objective will be to utilize a smaller turn radius and higher
                                                                  turn rate to gain positional advantage over the bandit
                                                                  until an optimum position for weapons employment can
          2
                                                                  be achieved. In a one-circle fight, the pilot must manage
                                                                  the energy state of the aircraft using AoA, engine thrust,
                                                                  and patience. If the pilot depletes the energy state of the
                                                                  aircraft in an attempt to hastily employ a weapon, the
                                                                  bandit may easily turn the tables, so to speak, if the
                                                                  weapon fails to impact the bandit aircraft.
                                                                  Even if positional advantage is not yet ideal for a gun
                                                                  shot, a high aspect missile shot may be taken if equipped
                                                                  with high-off-boresight missiles such as the AIM-9X.
                                                                  However, just as in the case of a two-circle fight, one
                                                                  should be prepared for the bandit to attempt the same if
                                                                  the bandit is equipped with high-off-boresight missiles as
          1
                                                                  well. Additionally, if the bandit is capable of high-alpha
                                                                  maneuvers, the bandit may not need to employ a high-
                                                                  off-boresight missile if the bandit is able to achieve
               BFM One-Circle Fight                               sufficient positional advantage to permit such an attempt.
As the opposing aircraft continue in a two-circle or one-circle fight, the positional geometry must be continually
assessed to determine whether positional advantage is being gained or lost, whether a weapon may be
successfully employed, and when to be prepared to defend against a weapon employed by the bandit.
•    If the bandit appears to be moving
     toward the nose of the ownship, the
                                                           Ownship is gaining         Bandit is gaining
     ownship is gaining positional advantage
                                                          positional advantage      positional advantage
     over the bandit.
•    If the bandit appears to be moving
     toward the tail of the ownship, the
     bandit is gaining positional advantage
     over the ownship.
•    If the aspect angle is low, the position is
     ideal for weapon employment due to the
     low crossing rate and requires less lead.              Low aspect                 Beam aspect                High aspect
                                                          bandit plan form           bandit plan form           bandit plan form
•    If the aspect angle is at the beam, the
     position is not ideal for weapon
     employment due to the high crossing
     rate and requires large amounts of lead.
•    If the aspect angle is high, one should
     be prepared to defend against a weapon
     employed by the bandit.                                    Assessing positional geometry from the bandit
When the bandit is in an offensive
position behind the ownship, the ownship
can exploit the available turning room to
increase a bandit’s aspect angle and
angle-off relative to the ownship to deny
or complicate the employment of a
weapon from the bandit against one’s
own aircraft.
In the example to the right, a bandit is
approaching from the 5 o’clock position,
with a low aspect angle and low angle-
off relative to the F-16’s heading. If the
F-16 were to turn away from the bandit,
                                                      More turning                               Less turning
the aspect angle and angle-off would be              room available                             room available
further reduced, simplifying the targeting
solution for the bandit and granting more
turning room.
If the F-16 turns into the bandit, the
aspect angle and angle-off will be
increased, restricting the turning room
within which the bandit must use. This
                                                                       Turning Room
will complicate the bandit’s targeting
solution and may force the bandit to
overshoot outside the F-16’s turn circle.
Engaged Fighter and Supporting Fighter
During Air Combat Maneuvers (ACM) in which two friendly aircraft are working as a team, one aircraft is
designated as the engaged fighter and the other is designated as the supporting fighter.
•    Engaged Fighter. When maneuvering offensively against a bandit, the engaged fighter is the aircraft that
     is actively maneuvering to employ a weapon. When maneuvering defensively against a bandit, the engaged
     fighter is the aircraft that is being engaged by the bandit.
•    Supporting Fighter. When the engaged fighter is maneuvering offensively against a bandit, the supporting
     fighter maintains a visual on the engaged fighter and tally on the bandit while remaining clear of the fight
     itself but remains ready to employ a weapon against the bandit, if necessary, in coordination with the
     engaged fighter and without endangering the engaged fighter itself. When the engaged fighter is
     maneuvering defensively against a bandit, the supporting fighter employs weapons against the bandit in
     coordination with the engaged fighter and without endangering the engaged fighter itself.
     In addition, the supporting fighter will also need to keep the engaged fighter informed of any other threats
     to the flight (to include other enemy aircraft as well as ground- or naval-based air defense systems) and be
     prepared to direct and cover the engaged fighter’s egress from the fight, if necessary. During close-range
     aerial combat, the engaged fighter will be solely focused on the bandit and reliant on the supporting fighter
     to maintain situational awareness of the battlespace beyond the immediate close-range fight.
It is important to note that any aircraft within the flight may become the engaged fighter, and that in the course
of a close-range WVR engagement the engaged and supporting fighter may change, and may in fact change
more than once. As mentioned above, it is important to develop a plan for how to employ the flight to maneuver,
attack, defend against, and ultimately defeat the bandit. When initiating an attack against an enemy aircraft, the
engaged fighter will typically be the flight lead with the wingman as the supporting fighter. However, when a
bandit is maneuvering against the flight, whether initiating an attack against the flight or if responding to the
flight’s attack against itself, the bandit may choose to engage the supporting fighter. In this instance, the roles
of engaged fighter and supporting fighter will swap.
It is critical that the supporting fighter maneuver to attain positional advantage against the bandit while not
impeding the ability for the engaged fighter to do the same. This can be accomplished by maneuvering within a
different plane of turn, extending from the fight to gain separation, or lagging slightly behind and offset from the
engaged fighter, depending on the positional geometry that would prevent placing oneself in danger of being
engaged by the bandit.



                                                                  Supporting fighter maneuvers
                                                                   into different plane of turn




                                                                    Engaged fighter maneuvers into
                                                                      one-circle fight with bandit




                           Supporting fighter offset into separate plane of turn

In the example below, the flight is approaching a merge with a bandit and breaks away from each other in
opposite directions. At this point, the bandit is forced to commit on one or the other, therefore the choice that
the bandit makes will be the determining factor regarding which flight member becomes the engaged fighter or
the supporting fighter. Once the engaged fighter is recognized, the engaged fighter will maneuver to attain
positional advantage against the bandit while the supporting fighter maneuvers to defend the engaged fighter.



                                Bandit commits on
                                                         1
                                 engaged fighter




                                                                        2
                                        Supporting fighter
                                         engages bandit
                                                                                 2
                      2
                                                                                      Engaged fighter turns
                                                                                     into and evades bandit




                               Flight separates to force bandit
                                   to commit on one aircraft

                               1                             1




                                           Merge into ACM Engagement
Air-to-Surface Missions
Air-to-surface missions can be demanding
missions to undertake. Any successful
strike mission requires detailed planning
to ensure that all the appropriate factors
are considered. In addition, all flight
members must ensure they have a
thorough understanding of the mission
and their respective duties at each phase
of the mission before climbing into the
cockpit.
Mission Objective
The first four factors that should be
considered when planning the mission are
related to the objective of the mission
itself.
     •    The nature of the objective (the targets and the desired weapon effects against them)
     •    The location of the objective (proximity to friendly units, distance from airfield, surrounding terrain)
     •    The timing of the objective (the time at which the desired weapon effects must be achieved)
     •    The on-station time over the objective (the duration of the desired weapon effects, if applicable)
These four factors will determine the selection of munitions that may be used to achieve the desired weapon
effects, the quantity of the given munitions the flight must employ to achieve the desired weapon effects, and
the required amount of fuel the flight must have onboard when committing to the objective. In addition, the time
of day at which the mission is undertaken may further refine what weapons or sensors may be used during the
attack itself.
Enemy Threats
The next set of factors that should be considered are related to the enemy’s ability to prevent the flight from
achieving the mission objective.
     •    Air defense threats surrounding the objective.
     •    Air defense threats that may be encountered while enroute to the objective.
     •    Airborne threats that may be encountered over the objective.
     •    Airborne threats that that may be encountered while enroute to the objective.
                                                                      These four factors will determine the
                                                                      selection of munitions that may be used to
                                                                      defend the flight against such threats while
                                                                      over or enroute to the objective, the quantity
                                                                      of such munitions the flight must carry to
                                                                      ensure their survival, and the configuration
                                                                      of the defensive countermeasures the flight
                                                                      should employ against such threats. In
                                                                      addition, these factors may further dictate
                                                                      the required amount of fuel the flight must
                                                                      have onboard when committing to the
                                                                      objective (for defensive maneuvering) and
                                                                      whether an external ECM pod must be
                                                                      carried.
Terrain and Weather
The third set of factors that should be considered are related to the environment the flight is expecting to
encounter while enroute to or from the objective, as well as at the objective itself.
     •    Terrain surrounding the objective.
     •    Terrain that will be encountered while enroute to the objective.
     •    Weather conditions that are expected over the objective.
     •    Weather conditions that may be encountered while enroute to the objective.
These four factors may limit the selection of munitions that may be successfully employed, or the specific attack
patterns that may be used to employ them. In addition, the terrain may be used to mitigate air defense or
airborne threats that may threaten the flight while enroute to the objective or when conducting the attack itself.
Once a tentative attack plan has been generated that has the highest likelihood of achieving the mission objectives
given the assessed factors, “backwards planning” techniques are used to plan each preceding event leading up
to the strike itself, which will include the ingress strategy and, by extension, the egress strategy. This will ensure
the flight arrives at the mission objective within the required timeline, with the required munitions to achieve the
mission objectives, and sufficient fuel remaining to return to base.


High Altitude Attack Profiles
High altitude attack profiles allow the flight to avoid
most short-range air defense systems such as AAA
or IR-guided weapons such as MANPADS. However,
this will also place the flight within the engagement
range of long-range/high-altitude air defense
systems and increase the probability of detection by
early warning systems or hostile aircraft.
High altitude flight will reduce the workload of flight
members, allowing pilots to maintain a higher
degree of situational awareness and providing more
time to acquire their target prior to weapons
release. Navigation is also simplified when there is
no risk of colliding with terrain, but weather and
visibility may play a more significant factor in target
acquisition.
Fuel consumption when flying at high altitudes will be significantly lower, allowing the flight to increase their
station time over an objective, attack targets at further ranges into enemy territory, or retain additional fuel
reserves for contingencies or defensive maneuvers.
High altitude flight will also provide an advantage when faced with airborne threats, especially if such hostile
aircraft are launched in response to the flight’s approach to the designated target area. In this situation, hostile
aircraft will be at an energy disadvantage while climbing to meet the incoming strike package. Additionally, air-
to-air missiles may be employed at longer ranges against airborne threats.
High Altitude Level Bombing
Performing level-bombing from high-altitude exposes the flight to the least amount of risk over the target area
and is the simplest attack technique to perform. However, this type of attack technique will typically require some
form of precision targeting to increase the likelihood of striking the intended target, which could take the form of
an onboard targeting pod to aid in target acquisition and designation; or an external source of targeting and
designation could be provided (such as another aircraft or ground force in vicinity of the target).
Multiple sensors may be used to acquire the target, such as radar, electro-optical targeting pods, night-vision
goggles, or even visual acquisition using the unaided eye. However, weather and time of day will play an
important factor in determining which sensors are required to find the target.
     High altitude run-in                          Line up weapon                     High altitudes pose no risk of
      from Initial Point                        symbology and release                 damage from own munitions
                                               weapons from level flight               or short-range air defenses




                                        High Altitude Level Bombing

High Altitude Dive Bombing
Dive bombing from high altitudes may expose the flight to additional risk by potentially entering the engagement
ranges of short-range air defenses or by colliding with terrain while pulling off following weapons release.
However, dive bombing increases the accuracy of delivering unguided weapons onto a target by engaging from
a closer range and reduces the dispersion by releasing the weapons from a vertical angle.
Dive bombing may also mitigate the effects of poor visibility over the target area by allowing the flight members
to visually acquire targets below the cloud layers prior to weapons release. But this carries with it the added risk
of colliding with terrain and should only be performed if each flight member has a thorough understanding of the
terrain contours and elevations surrounding the target and has implemented appropriate criteria of when to abort
the attack sequence if visual contact with the surface cannot be achieved.


                                                                 Roll upright while in a dive,
    High altitude run-in    Roll to bring nose down              line up weapon symbology,
     from Initial Point        to the target area                    and release weapons
                                                                                                 Pull off from target to
                                                                                                 avoid weapon effects




                                         High Altitude Dive Bombing
Low Altitude Attack Profiles
Low altitude attack profiles allow the flight to avoid
long-range/high-altitude air defense systems, delay
detection by early warning systems or hostile
aircraft, and minimize the reaction time of short-
range air defenses. However, this will also place the
flight within the engagement range of a greater
number of threat weapon systems.
Such low-altitude flight is more demanding, carries
additional risk, and requires a higher degree of skill
and proficiency to avoid becoming “task saturated”;
especially when performed at night. Situational
awareness is hindered due to the increased time
the flight members spend avoiding terrain and
obstacles instead of scanning outside for threats or
each other, or cross-checking cockpit displays and
sensor information.
Fuel consumption when flying at low altitudes will be significantly higher. Because of this, the time spent at low
altitudes should be minimized to ensure the flight retains enough fuel for egress or defensive maneuvering as
necessary. Performing aerial refueling prior to committing to a low-level strike should be considered, if feasible,
to provide additional options for any contingencies encountered during the mission.
Low altitude flight will also incur a disadvantage when faced with airborne threats, especially if such hostile
aircraft are directed to intercept the flight as they approach the designated target area. In this situation, hostile
aircraft will be at an energy advantage while intercepting the incoming strike package. Additionally, air-to-air
missiles will have reduced ranges against airborne threats.
Low Altitude Level/Retarded Bombing
Performing level-bombing from low-altitude exposes the flight to the most amount of risk over the target area,
exposes the flight to potential damage incurred from their own weapons as well as weapons fire from the enemy,
and will typically require the most accurate intelligence regarding the location of the intended target and its
surroundings. However, this type of attack technique will minimize the time spent within the Weapon Engagement
Zone (WEZ) of enemy air defense systems in vicinity of the target area, does not necessarily require precision
targeting to the same degree as high-altitude bombing, and is unlikely to be impacted by weather over the target
area.
Such attack techniques will typically require some form of deconfliction between each aircraft’s attack sequence
to ensure that the weapon effects from each flight member does not cause damage to their own aircraft. In
addition, munitions with some sort of retarding device may be required in the form of the Mk15 “Snakeye” petals
or the BSU-49 inflatable “ballute” tail kits, to ensure that the delivering aircraft has time to escape the effects of
their own weapons.
                                                             Line up weapon           Retarding devices allow
     Low altitude run-in                                  symbology and release      aircraft to escape weapon
      from Initial Point                                 weapons from level flight     effects prior to impact




                                   Low Altitude Level/Retarded Bombing
Low Altitude Pop-Up Dive Bombing
Pop-up dive bombing from low altitudes allows the flight to take advantage of a low-altitude attack profile while
providing the pilots additional time to acquire the intended target prior to weapons release, reduces the dispersion
of unguided weapons by releasing the weapons from a vertical angle, and also makes the flight pattern
unpredictable when being targeted by short-range air defenses. However, this is the most complex attack
technique to perform and is the most demanding on flight members.
By performing a pop-up from low altitude before reaching the target, pilots will have additional time to acquire
their intended targets prior to weapons release if the precise location or disposition of their targets are unknown;
or if the position quality of their navigation system is in question. But this carries with it the added risk of colliding
with terrain when pulling off following weapons release; and it may momentarily expose the flight to additional
enemy weapon systems in the target area by silhouetting themselves against the sky.

             Pop-op maneuver and                                      Roll upright while in a dive,
             roll to bring nose back                                  line up weapon symbology,
            down to the target area                                       and release weapons
                                                                                                      Pull off from target to
                                                                                                      avoid weapon effects

    Low altitude run-in
     from Initial Point




                                       Low Altitude Pop-Up Dive Bombing



Standoff Attack Profiles
Using “standoff” to engage targets from longer
range allows the flight to minimize the time spent
within the WEZ of enemy air defense systems, or
allows the flight to avoid the WEZ altogether. This
can be particularly beneficial when attacking
heavily defended targets, or when attempting to
maintain an element of surprise by avoiding
overflight and subsequent detection by nearby
enemy units.
Using standoff attacks will typically be driven by the
available munitions that are in use, which in turn
may be dictated by the nature of the target and the
desired weapon effects, the time of day, or the
weather conditions in vicinity of the target.
Toss Bombing
Toss bombing is an alternative to performing a level bomb delivery and uses the additional kinematics of releasing
a munition while in an ascending flight path to increase the ballistic range that the weapon can achieve following
release from the aircraft. Although toss bombing can be utilized from any altitude, it is more commonly used in
conjunction with a low-altitude pop-up maneuver, except the bomb is released during the pop-up climb itself
rather than during a subsequent dive onto the target.
Unfortunately, toss bombing increases the dispersion of unguided munitions within the target area. Additionally,
when performed from low altitudes, accurate intelligence regarding the location of the intended target and its
surroundings is required if the target is not acquired by the pilot prior to initiating the attack itself. However,
these disadvantages can be mitigated by using precision munitions and external sources of targeting and/or
designation.

    Turn away from
    target area after
    weapons release

                                             Line up weapon symbology,                    Ascending trajectory
                                             perform pop-up maneuver,                   extends ballistic range of
                                                and release weapons                     weapon following release
   Low altitude run-in
    from Initial Point




                                    Low Altitude Pop-Up Toss Bombing

Missile/Glide Bomb Delivery
Employing precision munitions such as missiles or glide bombs allows the flight to attack targets from extended
ranges with a high probability of striking the intended target. These munitions may typically be employed from a
variety of altitudes or attack profiles; but the primary limiting factors of these types of munitions are the range
at which the launching aircraft or the munition itself can acquire its target, or the range that the munition can
travel from the point of weapons release.
Employing missiles or glide bombs from high altitudes will improve the ability of the pilot to acquire the target
and will extend the kinematic range from which these weapons may be released. This will allow the launching
aircraft to release the munitions from a greater distance from the target, decreasing the likelihood of the flight
of being engaged by enemy weapon systems surrounding the target. However, this will also increase the chances
of detection by early warning systems and hostile aircraft; and it may place the flight in the WEZ of long-
range/high-altitude air defense systems.
Employing missiles or glide bombs from low altitudes will hinder the ability of the pilot to acquire the target
(depending on the nature of terrain surrounding the target area) and will reduce the kinematic range from which
these weapons may be released. This may force the launching aircraft to release the munitions from a closer
distance to the target, increasing the likelihood of the flight of being engaged by enemy weapon systems in the
target area. However, this will also decrease the chances of detection by early warning systems and hostile
aircraft; and it may allow the flight to avoid the WEZ of long-range/high-altitude air defense systems.
   High altitudes/high airspeeds
   extend range of glide bombs




                                                                            Standoff munitions lower
                                                                            the risk of engagement by
                                                                             enemy weapon systems
    Missiles employed
   from standoff range




                                        Missile/Glide Bomb Delivery
Ingress and Egress Strategies
Planning appropriate ingress and egress routes are just as important as the attack itself. The routes should avoid
known air defenses as much as possible while minimizing the chances of detection for as long as possible. At
times, it may be necessary for the flight to fight their way to and from the target area by engaging enemy threats
along the route to ensure the flight’s survival and ensure the target area can be reached to initiate the attack.
A combination of high and low altitudes may be utilized at different phases of the route as appropriate, along
with terrain masking, ECM jamming, and unpredictable flight patterns to have a collective effect in degrading or
defeating the enemy’s ability to successfully engage the strike package.
In the example below, a strike is planned against a heavily defended target in enemy territory, such as an airfield
or a command center. The initial portion of the ingress begins at high altitude when crossing the FEBA, where
there are likely substantial numbers of tactical ground units equipped with heavy machine guns, light AAA, and
MANPADS. After these units are overflown and the flight approaches the Weapons Engagement Zone (WEZ) of
long-range/high-altitude SAM batteries, the flight descends to low altitude and uses a combination of threat
avoidance, terrain masking, and ECM to avoid engagement. Once the strike is complete, the flight egresses along
a different route and again uses low altitude, threat avoidance, terrain masking, and ECM to avoid an enemy
engagement. When feasible, the flight climbs back to high altitude for the remainder of the flight back to base.

                                                                                                                     High Altitude Flight
                       Attack sequence minimizes the              Flight immediately exits                           Low Altitude Flight
                      time spent within the WEZ of air            the WEZ of short-range
                        defenses protecting the target            air defenses after attack




                                                                                STPT
                                                                                                  STPT

                                                            TGT

                                                                   STPT                          STPT
                                                    IP


                                                                                                                 STPT

                                                                       Flight utilizes low altitude and
                                                                        ECM to reduce effectiveness
                                                                        of long-range SAM batteries
                                                                                                              STPT
                             Flight transitions to low
                        altitude phase of ingress route
                                                             STPT                          STPT




                                                                                                      Flight transitions to high altitude
                                  Flight overflies short-                                            phase of egress route and departs
                                 range air defenses near                                               through gap in the high terrain
                                the FEBA at high altitude


                                              Ingress and Egress Planning
The scenario above is just one example; each mission may require various techniques for ingress and egress.
Some missions may need to be flown entirely at low altitude or entirely at high altitude, or a combination of each
as shown above. When threats cannot be avoided or engaged with the flight’s own weapons, it may be necessary
to rely on other flights within a “strike package” for fighter escort or suppression of enemy air defenses.
Pre-Combat Checks
When approaching the combat area, flight members should conduct pre-combat checks and ensure their aircraft
are ready to employ weapons and defensive countermeasures as needed. This is commonly referred to as the
“Fence Check”. Many of the systems may already be appropriately configured during the initial run-up prior to
departure or while enroute, but the final Fence Check allows each pilot to confirm their respective aircraft is ready
for combat.
The Flight Lead may direct each flight member to perform one final Fence Check prior to entering the combat
area using the brevity term “Fence In”. Conversely, the Flight Lead may direct each flight member to perform a
Fence Check after exiting the combat area using the brevity term “Fence Out”.
Fence Check
Fuel
     1.    Total fuel quantity – Check.
     2.    FUEL QTY SEL knob – Check balance between
           tanks.
                                                                                               10       12-15
                                                                                           5
     3.    ENGINE FEED knob – Set to NORM.                                        8
                                                                          7
     4.    TANK INERTING switch – Set to TANK                                          6
           INERTING.
Emitters
                                                                                                                 1
     5.    TACAN – Set A/A T/R settings or configure as
                                                                                                    2
           necessary.
     6.    FCR – Set mode and scan volume.                                15      16                            17
                                                                     8
     7.    RF switch – Set as required.
     8.    RWR – Configure as necessary.
     9.    ECM control panel – Configure as necessary.
                                                                              9
     10. IFF – Set modes & codes; configure as
         necessary. (N/I)                                        3
                                                                     10   11
                                                                 4
     11. EXT LIGHTING control panel – Set MASTER
         knob to OFF (or as appropriate).
Navigation
     12. STPT/DEST pages – Verify steerpoint data.
     13. NAV page – Verify SYS ACCUR and GPS ACCUR are HIGH.
     14. FIX/A-CAL pages – Perform updates as necessary.
Chaff/Flares
     15. CMDS settings – Configure as necessary on CMDS control panel and CMDS DED page.
     16. CMDS MODE knob – Set to MAN, SEMI, or AUTO as required.
     17. CMS switch – Press to Aft position to confirm consent in SEMI/AUTO modes; or press to Right position
         to revoke consent in SEMI/AUTO modes.
Employment
   18. SMS – Check weapon profiles and settings in
                                                                    21
       each master mode (AAM, A-G, MSL, DGFT)
   19. MASTER ARM switch – Set as required.
   20. LASER ARM switch – Set as required.
   21. HUD control panel – Configure as desired;               23        18
       confirm correct symbology and indications     20

       are displayed.                                19

   22. AUDIO 1 & AUDIO 2 control panels - Set
       volume levels as desired.
   23. SOI – Confirm or set as desired.



                                                                              21

                                                          22
Flight Formations
U.S. Air Force F-16 squadrons typically consist of 15-24 aircraft. However, tactical missions are commonly
assigned to 4-ship combat formations called “flights”, which consist of two 2-ship fighting units called “elements”.
Each 4-ship flight is commanded by a Flight Lead, with the second element within the flight commanded by a 2-
ship Element Lead. The Flight Lead is responsible for ensuring the success of the flight’s mission and will direct
the actions of the other flight members accordingly.
                         Flight Lead

                                             Wingman 2
                                                               Element Lead
                                                                Wingman 3

                                                                                   Wingman 4




                                            Structure of 4-ship Flight

When approaching the combat area, flight members should conduct pre-combat checks and ensure their aircraft
are ready to employ weapons and defensive countermeasures as needed. Accordingly, wingmen should adjust
their formation and flight patterns to those which are best suited for the tactical situation, routing, and speeds
they intend to fly. In particular, flying in close formation can drastically hinder the collective situational awareness
of the flight if each wingman is solely focused on maintaining a specific formation spacing close to each other,
instead of focusing on their respective cockpit sensors and displays, such as the Fire Control Radar, Threat
Warning Azimuth Indicator, the HARM Attack Display, or the Horizontal Situation Display. In addition, close
formations impede the ability of the flight leader or wingmen to perform immediate combat maneuvers in
response to hostile aircraft or surface-to-air weapons fire; at the risk of a mid-air collision.


Formation Types
Several types of formations may be employed by the Flight Lead, each with a pre-briefed “Close” or “Open”
distance between each flight member. Each formation type has its own advantages and disadvantages, depending
on the tactical situation or maneuvers the flight is undertaking.
Line Abreast
This formation allows the Flight Lead to maximize the firepower of the formation toward the forward sector,
especially when faced with hostile aircraft approaching from the 12 o’clock. This formation also provides mutual
support to flight members if engaged from the sides or from the rear of the formation, while complicating the
ability for the enemy to visually acquire the entire flight.
However, this formation may also complicate the ability of the Flight Lead to rapidly reorient the flight toward a
different direction while maintaining formation. In these instances, it may take time for the flight to regain their
assigned positions following a change in heading, with larger course changes requiring additional time to regain
proper position and spacing.
       Flight Lead                     Wingman 2                      Wingman 3                      Wingman 4




       Close              1 NM                            1 NM                           1 NM
       Open              1½ NM                           1½ NM                          1½ NM

                                             Line Abreast Formation
Trail
This formation simplifies the ability of the remaining flight members to maneuver relative to the Flight Lead when
operating under night-vision goggles (NVGs) or amongst restrictive terrain during low-level flight. This formation
also provides mutual support to flight members if engaged from the sides of the formation and allows any flight
member to immediately perform defensive maneuvers in response to threats.
However, this formation hinders the ability of the Flight Lead to maximize the firepower of the formation toward
the forward sector while increasing the ability for hostile aircraft to visually acquire the entire flight, especially
when faced with hostile aircraft approaching from the 12 o’clock.
       Flight Lead                     Wingman 2                           Wingman 3                       Wingman 4




        Close             1 NM                              1 NM                              1 NM
        Open             1½ NM                             1½ NM                             1½ NM

                                                   Trail Formation

                                                                                           Flight Lead

Wedge
This formation allows the Flight Lead to maintain an
offensive posture against hostile aircraft in the forward                     Close ⅓ NM
                                                                              Open ¾ NM
hemisphere. This formation also simplifies the ability of the
remaining flight members maneuver relative to the Flight
Lead when operating in limited visibility (night or bad
                                                                   Wingman 2               Close ¾ NM
weather) or amongst restrictive terrain during low-level
                                                                                           Open 1½ NM
flight.
However, this formation may also complicate the ability of
the flight members to respond to threats from the 6
o’clock. In addition, depending on the relative approach
aspect, it may be easier for hostile aircraft to visually                        Wingman 3
acquire the entire flight.                                                                               Close ⅓ NM
                                                                                                         Open ¾ NM



                                                                                                                 Wingman 4


                                                                                       Wedge Formation
Echelon (Left/Right)
This formation allows the Flight Lead to maintain an         Flight Lead
offensive posture against hostile aircraft in the
forward sector and simplifies the ability of each flight
member in maintaining visual contact with the                                  Wingman 2
preceding wingman.
                                                                Close ⅓ NM
However, this formation compounds the workload of               Open ⅔ NM
each successive wingman when performing course                                                 Wingman 3

changes, especially when the Flight Lead must turn
toward the formation. This formation also                                         Close ⅓ NM
                                                                                  Open ⅔ NM
complicates the ability of the flight members to                                                                 Wingman 4
respond to threats from the 6 o’clock; and the
relative proximity between flight members increases                                               Close ⅓ NM
                                                                                                  Open ⅔ NM
the ability for hostile aircraft to visually acquire the
entire flight.
                                                                                 Echelon Formation
Finger Four
This formation simplifies the ability of the remaining                      Flight Lead
flight members to maneuver relative to the Flight
Lead when operating in limited visibility (night or bad
weather) or amongst restrictive terrain during low-         Close 250 ft                  Close 250 ft
level flight.                                               Open 500 ft                   Open 500 ft

However, this formation may degrade the situational
awareness of the wingmen by requiring them to
                                                                                                    Wingman 3
perform more frequent cross-checks of their positions
when in close proximity instead of focusing on their        Wingman 2
sensors and displays. This formation also complicates                                     Close 250 ft
                                                                                          Open 500 ft
the ability of the flight members to respond to threats
from the 6 o’clock; and the relative proximity between                                                          Wingman 4
flight members increases the ability for hostile aircraft
to visually acquire the entire flight.                                     Finger Four Formation


Spread Four
Similar to the Line Abreast formation, this formation allows the Flight Lead to maximize the firepower of the
formation toward the forward sector, especially when faced with hostile aircraft approaching from the 12 o’clock.
This formation also simplifies the ability of Wingman 2 and 4 to maneuver relative to the Flight Lead and Element
Lead, respectively.
However, like Line Abreast, this formation may complicate the ability of the second element to maintain position
relative to the first element during large course changes. In addition the relative proximity between flight
members may complicate the ability of the flight members to perform defensive maneuvers in response to threats;
as well as increase the ability for hostile aircraft to visually acquire the entire flight.
                                     Flight Lead                            Wingman 3




                      Close 250 ft                    Close ½ NM                          Close 250 ft
                      Open 500 ft                     Open 1 NM                           Open 500 ft




                       Wingman 2                                                          Wingman 4

                                               Spread Four Formation
COCKPIT AND AVIONICS INTERFACE
The F-16C’s cockpit layout and fire control avionics are designed to maximize single-pilot tactical efficiency and
minimize pilot workload in combat. Essential information is presented on the Heads-Up Display (HUD), two
Multifunction Displays (MFD), and the Data Entry Display (DED). These four displays, along with the placement
of the Integrated Control Panel (ICP) and Threat Warning Azimuth Indicator, allow the pilot to remain focused
outside the aircraft as much as possible and, when necessary to look down inside the cockpit, minimize the time
required to be “heads down”.
Most targeting and weapons                                          Primary flight instruments, displays,
controls are placed on the Side                                       and mission equipment controls

Stick Controller (SSC) and Throttle
Grip, to allow the pilot to maintain
hands on the flight controls during
high-performance          maneuvers,                    Warning Lights                                Warning Lights
especially during air-to-air combat.
Panels and switches that are rarely
used once airborne are located in
the aft consoles of the cockpit;
while those controls that interact
with mission-specific equipment,
                                         Takeoff/landing and                                                        Secondary flight,
such as auxiliary communications,                                                                                 engine, and systems
                                          ground operations
defensive systems, and exterior                                                                                     instrumentation
lighting, are located relatively close
to the flight controls for immediate
and efficient access. In addition,
the majority of mission equipment
panels are placed along the left         Power, propulsion,
console near the throttle to permit       and fuel controls
the pilot to maintain positive control
                                                                                                                   Cockpit lighting
of the aircraft using the SSC.                                                                                     and life support
                                                                            Mission equipment
The fire control and sensors are
managed through the use of pilot-
selectable master modes. Within
each master mode, each of the F-
16’s sensors, which includes the fire                                       Start-up, shutdown,
control radar (FCR), targeting pod                                           and flight control
                                                                            checks/malfunctions
(TGP), and HARM Targeting System
(HTS), are focused onto a single
geographic     location    in    the                                     Cockpit Workflow
battlespace known as the System-
Point-of-Interest (SPI).
As all aircraft sensors are directed toward the SPI, only one sensor is capable of driving the 3-dimensional location
of the SPI at any given time. When a sensor enters a “tracking” state, such as when the FCR has locked onto
another aircraft or the targeting pod has begun tracking a ground target, the SPI will coincide with the tracking
solution of that sensor. As a result, any remaining sensors will become slaved to the SPI location. However, if a
different sensor is subsequently commanded into a “tracking” state, the remaining sensors will break track from
their target and become slaved to the SPI.
The pilot may interact with only one aircraft sensor at a time, known as the Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI). Many
functions of the Hands-On Controls will be contextually dependent on the current SOI selection, the state of that
sensor, the current weapon delivery sub-mode, and the selected SMS weapon profile. In addition, some MFD
formats (such as the HSD) may be designated as SOI to facilitate interaction through the Hands-On Controls.
MASTER MODES
The F-16C’s sensors, avionics, and fire control configurations are managed through the use of pilot-selectable
master modes. There are seven master modes in total, with multiple weapon delivery sub-modes to accommodate
various methods of targeting, designation, and weapons employment.
When the pilot switches from one master mode to another, avionics settings and MFD states are retained within
the previous master mode. This allows the pilot to configure specific avionics settings for each master mode prior
to the mission for efficient cockpit management when in the mission area; or to return to a previous task if forced
to switch to a different master mode abruptly. This can be especially useful if engaged by hostile fighters during
a strike mission, in which case the pilot would need to rapidly re-configure the FCR, SMS weapon profile, and
MFDs for aerial combat. In the F-16C, this can be accomplished with a push of a button or thumb press of a
switch on the throttle, allowing the pilot to immediately respond to changes in the tactical situation as they occur.



                              Emergency Jettison
                                Master Mode

            Button
           Depressed



                                Missile Override                                  Dogfight
                                 Master Mode                                     Master Mode

            Switch
            offset



                                Air-to-Air Missile                               Air-to-Ground
                                  Master Mode                                    Master Mode

                                    SMS                                                     SMS

                              Selective Jettison                                      Selective Jettison
                                Master Mode                                             Master Mode


             Switch
            centered

                                                           Navigation                     Selective Jettison
                                                                                SMS
                                                          Master Mode                       Master Mode




                                      Master Mode Selection Hierarchy
The three primary master modes are Navigation (NAV), Air-to-Air Missile (AAM), and Air-to-Ground (A-G), which
are accessed using the A-A and A-G master mode buttons on the Integrated Control Panel (ICP). Two secondary
master modes are Dogfight (DGFT) and Missile Override (MSL), which are accessed using the DOG FIGHT switch
on the throttle grip. (See Hands-On Controls for more information.)
Two additional modes are Selective Jettison (S-J) and Emergency Jettison (E-J). The former may be entered from
NAV, AAM, or A-G master modes by accessing the SMS Selective Jettison (S-J) page. The latter is entered when
the Emergency Jettison button on the Left Auxiliary Console is pressed and held.
Navigation (NAV) Master Mode
Navigation mode is the default master mode that is entered when the avionics are initialized. NAV mode is used
for takeoff, landing, navigation, and when performing navigation position updates. “NAV” is displayed in the HUD
Master Mode Status.
When Navigation master mode is entered, the following changes will take effect:
     •     The FCR will default to CRM mode but may be changed to any air-to-air or air-to-ground mode.
     •     The HUD will display navigation-related symbology only.
     •     “NAV” will be displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status.
     •     MFD formats and format selections will be displayed as last set for Navigation mode.
The TGP and HTS pods may be used while
in NAV mode (to include firing the laser
rangefinder/designator or designating
radar threats on the HAD MFD format), but
weapons employment will not be possible.
The default MFD formats for each MFD
when the aircraft is set to Navigation mode
are shown to the right. However, these
may be changed at any time during the
mission and will be retained during master
mode switchovers.


Air-to-Air Missile (AAM) Mode
Air-to-Air Missile mode is used for aerial combat and employing air-to-air guided missiles and the 20mm rotary
cannon against enemy aircraft. AAM mode is entered by pressing the A-A master mode button on the ICP if the
master mode is set to either NAV or A-G mode. Pressing the A-A master mode button when already in AAM will
set the master mode to NAV.
When Air-to-Air Missile master mode is entered, the following changes will take effect:
     •     The FCR will default to CRM mode but may be changed to any other air-to-air mode.
     •     The HUD will display missile-related symbology, based on the selected missile type.
     •     “MRM”, “SRM”, or “HOB” will be displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status, depending on which missile
           type was last selected in AAM mode, along with the missile quantity of that type. If no air-to-air missiles
           are loaded, “AAM” is displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status.
     •     If the Master Arm switch is set to ARM, AIM-9 seekers on any air-to-air missile stations will be cooled.
     •     MFD formats and format selections will be displayed as last set for Air-to-Air Missile mode.
Note that a specific missile type may be set
on the SMS for each air-to-air master mode
(AAM, MSL, or DGFT). By simply switching
between these modes, a different missile
type will be automatically selected.
The default MFD formats for each MFD
when the aircraft is set to Air-to-Air Missile
mode are shown to the right. However,
these may be changed at any time during
the mission and will be retained during
master mode switchovers.
Air-to-Ground (A-G) Master Mode
Air-to-Ground mode is used for delivering munitions against ground targets. A-G mode is entered by pressing the
A-G master mode button on the ICP if the master mode is set to either NAV or A-A mode. Pressing the A-G master
mode button when already in A-G will set the master mode to NAV.
When Air-to-Ground master mode is entered, the following changes will take effect:
     •    If a “Pre-planned” weapon delivery sub-mode is entered, the FCR will default to GM but may be changed
          to GMT or SEA modes. If a “Visual” weapon delivery sub-mode is entered, the FCR will enter AGR mode
          and cannot be changed.
     •    The HUD will display weapon delivery symbology, based on the SMS weapon profile and the selected
          weapon delivery sub-mode, which will be displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status.
     •    MFD formats and format selections will be displayed as last set for Air-to-Ground master mode.
The default MFD formats for each MFD
when the aircraft is set to Air-to-Ground
master mode are shown to the right.
However, these may be changed at any
time during the mission and will be
retained during master mode switchovers.




Missile Override (MSL) Mode
Missile Override mode is used to rapidly configure the aircraft for aerial combat directly from the flight controls
by moving the DOG FIGHT switch to the inboard position on the throttle. Missile Override mode will take
precedence over the previous master mode, with the exception of Emergency Jettison. Returning the DOG FIGHT
switch to the center position will return to the previous master mode prior to entering Missile Override.
When Missile Override master mode is entered, the following changes will take effect:
     •    The FCR will default to CRM mode but may be changed to any air-to-air mode.
     •    The HUD will display missile-related symbology, based on the selected missile type.
     •    “MRM”, “SRM”, or “HOB” will be displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status, depending on which missile
          type was last selected in Missile Override mode, along with the missile quantity of that type.
     •    If the Master Arm switch is set to ARM, AIM-9 seekers on any air-to-air missile stations will be cooled.
     •    MFD formats and format selections will be displayed as last set for Missile Override mode.
Note that a specific missile type may be set
on the SMS for each air-to-air master mode
(AAM, MSL, or DGFT). By simply switching
between these modes, a different missile
type will be automatically selected.
The default MFD formats for each MFD
when the aircraft is set to Missile Override
mode are shown to the right. However,
these may be changed at any time during
the mission and will be retained during
master mode switchovers.
Dogfight (DGFT) Mode
Dogfight mode is used to rapidly configure the aircraft for aerial combat directly from the flight controls by moving
the DOG FIGHT switch to the outboard position on the throttle. Dogfight mode will take precedence over the
previous master mode, with the exception of Emergency Jettison. Returning the DOG FIGHT switch to the center
position will return to the previous master mode prior to entering Dogfight.
When Dogfight master mode is entered, the following changes will take effect:
     •     The FCR will default to ACM mode but may be changed to any air-to-air mode.
     •     The M61 20mm rotary cannon will be enabled in EEGS sub-mode.
     •     The HUD will be decluttered and optimized for close-range aerial combat maneuvers, EEGS-related
           symbology will be displayed, and the Velocity Scale will automatically revert to calibrated airspeed
           (CAS) regardless of the Velocity switch position on the HUD Control Panel.
     •     “DGFT” will be displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status
     •     If the Master Arm switch is set to ARM, AIM-9 seekers on any air-to-air missile stations will be cooled.
     •     MFD formats and format selections will be displayed as last set for Dogfight mode.
Note that a specific missile type may be set
on the SMS for each air-to-air master mode
(AAM, MSL, or DGFT). By simply switching
between these modes, a different missile
type will be automatically selected.
The default MFD formats for each MFD
when the aircraft is set to Dogfight mode
are shown to the right. However, these
may be changed at any time during the
mission and will be retained during master
mode switchovers.


Selective Jettison (JETT) Mode
Selective Jettison mode is used to jettison individual weapons and/or weapon stations from the underwing pylons
without arming the weapons themselves. Selective Jettison mode is entered by pressing OSB 11 on the SMS MFD
format. Pressing OSB 11 when already in S-J mode will set the master mode back to the previous selection.
The default MFD formats for each MFD
when the aircraft is set to Selective Jettison
mode are shown to the right. However,
these may be changed at any time during
the mission and will be retained during
master mode switchovers.
Emergency Jettison (JETT) Mode
Emergency Jettison mode is used to jettison all weapons (except for air-to-air missiles) and fuel tanks from
underwing stations 3 through 7. Emergency Jettison mode is entered by pressing and holding the Emergency
Jettison button on the Left Auxiliary Console, which will override all other master modes. Releasing the Emergency
Jettison button will set the master mode back to the previous selection.
The default MFD formats for each MFD
when the aircraft is set to Emergency
Jettison mode are shown to the right.




Cycling MFD Formats using the Side Stick Controller
Each MFD is assigned three formats for each master mode. These formats can be selected for display by pressing
the corresponding Format Select OSB below the format label. The assigned format for each Format Select button
can be re-assigned at any time during the mission. (See Multi-Function Displays for more information.)
The MFD format can also be cycled using the Display Management Switch
(DMS) on the Side Stick Controller (SSC), allowing the pilot to seamlessly
select a different MFD format while maintaining hands on the flight
controls. This can be especially useful during high-G maneuvers that might
preclude reaching out to an MFD to press the OSB directly, or when
needing to quickly assign the Sensor-Of-Interest to an MFD format that is
not current displayed. See Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI) on the following page      Display Management
                                                                                  Switch (4-way)
for more information.
When the DMS switch is pressed left or right, the corresponding MFD will
cycle to the next assigned format in an outwards fashion. If one of the
Format Select buttons have been assigned to the BLANK MFD format, that
button will be skipped in the sequence, and will simply toggle between the
two remaining formats. If two of the Format Select buttons have been
assigned to the BLANK MFD format, DMS will have no effect on that MFD.




                                      Cycle Left                 Cycle Right
                                      MFD Format                 MFD Format




                      MFD Format cycle logic using Display Management Switch
SENSOR-OF-INTEREST (SOI)
The Sensor-Of-Interest is the sensor or display to which the hands-on controls are currently assigned. The
controls on the Side Stick Controller (SSC) and throttle grip, such as the Target Management Switch (TMS),
Expand/FOV button, or RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch, will only affect the sensor that is currently assigned as SOI.
The SOI can be identified by a white box around the MFD screen or an asterisk in the top left of the HUD.
Additionally, when an MFD is displaying a format that may be assigned as SOI, but is not SOI at the current time,
a “NOT SOI” advisory message will be displayed in the upper portion of the MFD.

   SOI Asterisk




                                                         SOI Box                        “NOT SOI” Advisory




The SOI is assigned to the HUD or either MFD by the Display Management Switch (DMS) on the SSC. The MFD
formats that can be assigned as SOI are FCR, TGP, WPN, HSD, and HAD. When re-assigning SOI from the HUD,
if either MFD format can be assigned as SOI, the priority MFD format for the current mode will be set as SOI.




                                                                             Display Management
                                                                                Switch (4-way)

                  1                                                      1
                       2                                             2




                                   1. Set HUD as SOI from MFD




                                   2. Set SOI to MFD from HUD
                                   3. Swap SOI between MFDs


                                               3


                      SOI assignment cycle logic using Display Management Switch
SYSTEM-POINT-OF-INTEREST (SPI)
The System-Point-of-Interest (SPI) is a singular aimpoint to which the F-16’s sensors are directed. The location
to which the SPI is assigned is predicated on the selected master mode, the current air-to-ground weapon delivery
sub-mode (when in A-G master mode), and the selected sighting point (when in NAV or A-G master modes). The
SPI itself may only be controlled by a single source, which is either the Modular Mission Computer (MMC) or one
of the aircraft sensors when in a “tracking” state.
When the MMC is in control of the SPI, the 3-dimensional location of the SPI is maintained relative to the aircraft’s
navigation solution. As such, if the SPI is assigned to the location of a steerpoint, the aircraft sensors will be
directed toward that 3-dimensional location based on where the navigation solution has calculated the steerpoint
to be in relation to the aircraft. If the pilot uses the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch to slew the SPI to a different
location, the MMC will slew the SPI based on the cursor inputs and the aircraft sensors will follow accordingly.
When an aircraft sensor is in control of the SPI, the 3-dimensional location of the SPI is maintained by the sensor
that is in a “tracking” state. When a sensor enters a tracking state, the SPI will coincide with the tracking solution
of that sensor and any remaining sensors will be slaved to the SPI. As such, only one sensor is capable of being
in control of the SPI at any given time. However, if a different sensor is subsequently commanded into a tracking
state, that sensor will assume control of the SPI and the previously tracking sensor will break track and become
slaved to the SPI.
If the air-to-ground weapon delivery sub-mode is set to any “Pre-planned” weapon delivery sub-mode (CCRP,
LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, PRE) or Manual bombing (MAN), or if the selected weapon on the SMS page is set to
AGM-88 missiles (AG88), the SPI is assigned to the sighting point displayed at, and selected by, OSB 10 on the
FCR and TGP MFD formats, which may be slewed via the Navigation cursor. Regardless of which sighting point
is selected, weapon release parameters and symbology within the cockpit are always displayed based on
calculations to the location of the Target (TGT) sighting point.




                                                                                        SPI

                                                 FCR and TGP directed at                 Weapon calculations performed to
                                              System-Point-of-Interest (SPI)              the Target (TGT), regardless of
                                               at an offset aimpoint (OA1)                  the selected sighting point




                SPI assigned to the selected sighting point in “Pre-planned” sub-modes

It is important to note that when employing inertially aided munitions such as JDAM (GBU-38/GBU-31), JSOW
(AGM-154A), or WCMD (CBU-103/CBU-105), the SPI will be transferred to the weapon guidance unit as the target
location, even though the release calculations are being performed to the TGT sighting point. It is imperative that
the selected sighting point and the target within the TGP are confirmed prior to weapon release.
If the Snowplow sighting method is employed while the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to any “Pre-planned”
sub-mode, the SPI is assigned to the Snowplow cursor.
If the air-to-ground weapon delivery sub-mode is set to any “Visual” weapon delivery sub-mode that employs a
ground designation (DTOS, EO-VIS, or VIS), the SPI coincides with the position of the Visual cursor.




                                                                                                    SPI




                                                             FCR and TGP directed at         Weapon calculations performed to
                                                             System-Point-of-Interest        the designated ground location at
                                                              (SPI) at Visual cursor          the Target Designator (TD) Box.




                  SPI assigned to Visual cursor in DTOS, EO-VIS, and VIS sub-modes

If the air-to-ground weapon delivery sub-mode is set to any “Visual” weapon delivery sub-mode that employs a
dynamic pipper within the HUD to display the estimated impact point on the ground (CCIP or STRF), the SPI
coincides with the calculated impact point.




                                                                               CCIP Pipper




                                                                                   SPI
                                          FCR and TGP directed at                                Pipper displays the estimated
                                          System-Point-of-Interest                                impact point on the ground.
                                           (SPI) at weapon pipper




                      SPI assigned to weapon pipper in CCIP and STRF sub-modes

Although the F-16 is designed to employ a single SPI location to which all sensors are directed, there are certain
conditions in which individual aircraft sensors may track separate targets or surface locations.
•    If the master mode is set to NAV, the FCR may track an airborne target in CRM or ACM radar modes while
     the TGP is tracking a surface target/location in A-G mode or a radar threat is designated on the HAD.
•    If the master mode is set to NAV, the TGP may track an airborne target in A-A mode while the FCR is
     tracking a surface target/location in GM, GMT, or SEA radar modes or a radar is designated on the HAD.
•    If the master mode is set to NAV, AAM, MSL, or DGFT, the FCR may track an airborne target in CRM or ACM
     radar modes while the TGP is independently tracking a second airborne target in A-A mode.
WEAPON DELIVERY SUB-MODES
When conducting attacks against ground targets, a variety of weapon delivery sub-modes may be utilized by the
pilot. The weapon delivery sub-modes that are available for selection may depend on the selected weapon, and
whether the target is located at a known location designated by a steerpoint or acquired during the mission using
onboard sensors or the pilot’s eyesight. As such, these air-to-ground weapon delivery sub-modes are delineated
into two categories: “Pre-planned” sub-modes and “Visual” sub-modes.




“Pre-planned” Weapon Delivery Sub-modes                         “Visual” Weapon Delivery Sub-modes
Target location is designated by a steerpoint.                  Target is visually acquired by the pilot.
•    CCRP Continuously-Computed Release Point                   •    CCIP Continuously-Computed Impact Point
•    LADD Low Altitude Drogue Delivery                          •    DTOS Dive/Toss
•    EO-PRE Electro-Optical Pre-planned                         •    STRF Strafe
•    EO-BORE Electro-Optical Boresight                          •    EO-VIS Electro-Optical Visual
•    PRE Pre-planned                                            •    VIS Visual
•    HARM High-speed Anti-Radiation Missile
•    HTS HARM Targeting System
Each category of weapon delivery sub-modes differs in how the target is designated and what type of weapon
employment symbology cues are provided to the pilot. However, the pilot retains the ability to dynamically change
between weapon delivery sub-modes using the Hands-On Controls at any time, even during an attack itself.
As an example, while performing a low-altitude ingress toward a target, the pilot may utilize CCRP to receive
steering toward a pre-planned steerpoint located at the expected position of the target itself. Just prior to arriving
at the steerpoint, the pilot performs a rapid climb to gain altitude over the target area in order to visually confirm
the target location prior to weapon release. When the target is sighted, the pilot notes that the target location is
several hundred meters from the steerpoint symbol within the HUD, which may be due to accumulated errors
within the navigation system during the flight, inaccurate intelligence regarding the target location, or (if the
target is mobile) the target may have simply moved. The pilot presses the MSL STEP button on the side stick to
immediately switch to CCIP or DTOS and visually attack the target independently of the pre-planned steerpoint.
“Pre-planned” Weapon Delivery Sub-modes
Attacks against pre-planned targets are facilitated by setting a steerpoint at the location of the intended target.
This target steerpoint is used by the avionics to direct the pilot to the target location, perform weapon delivery
calculations, and to generate targeting symbology for the pilot during the attack sequence itself. To that end, the
navigation solution of the aircraft must be accurate enough to ensure the weapon delivery calculations and the
corresponding targeting symbology reflect the true location of the target up to the point of weapons release.
(See the Air-to-Ground Employment chapter for more information regarding each weapon delivery sub-mode.)


Sighting Points and Cursor Corrections
Various methods may be used update the navigation solution to mitigate accumulated errors and regain the
accuracy needed to reliably navigate across long distances and deliver munitions onto the intended target.
However, if it is not feasible to perform a navigation update, which may be the case just prior to arriving over
the intended target or if performing low-level flight in an area devoid of any useable landmarks, or if a small
aiming correction is required to ensure weapon release calculations are accurate, a temporary correction may be
applied by “slewing” the Navigation cursor. In this case, a navigation update is not performed, but navigation
steering and weapon release calculations are adjusted to account for small inaccuracies in the system navigation
solution. (See Navigation Updates in the Navigation chapter for more information.)
Since any drift within the navigation solution will affect the accuracy of the target steerpoint relative to the target’s
physical location, and therefore the accuracy of the weapon release calculations and corresponding symbology,
the pilot may utilize “sighting points” for confirming or correcting the alignment of the weapon delivery symbology
over the target. Sighting points typically consist of steerpoints and their corresponding offset aimpoints (if used).
If the selected sighting point is not aligned with the physical location to which the sighting point corresponds,
corrections may be made using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle. When such adjustments are
performed, the pilot is using a “cursor slew” rather than performing an actual update to the navigation system.
     1. Pilot visually recognizes the       2. RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch            3. The cursor slew is retained     Target (TGT)
   Steerpoint Diamond in the HUD is          is used to slew the Steerpoint       for all steerpoints, allowing the
 offset from a distinct landmark that is    Diamond until it is aligned with       pilot to proceed on the route
 used to identify the steerpoint location     the corresponding landmark             with corrected symbology               Mission target




                                                              Steerpoint (STP)



                                                                               Railroad crossing




                          Cursor slew correction using “direct sighting” through the HUD

It is important to note that since the navigation system is not receiving a position update, the system navigation
solution will not change with the cursor slew. Rather, the pilot is applying a manual adjustment to the Navigation
cursor so that the Steerpoint Diamond within the HUD symbology aligns with the corresponding location or
landmark seen outside the cockpit. As the pilot proceeds on the planned route through subsequent steerpoints,
the cursor slew is retained so that all steerpoints receive the same corrections at once.
In the event such landmarks cannot be visually acquired by the pilot, as in the case of low-light conditions,
adverse weather, or it is simply too far to be seen, the FCR or TGP may be used to perform the same corrections.
However, just as is the case where the pilot must see landmarks to perform a cursor slew using the HUD
symbology as a reference, the sighting point location must be detectable by the FCR to the extent it can be
distinguished amongst the ground clutter, or recognizable within the TGP’s optical sensors.
In such cases where a “direct sighting” of the steerpoint location cannot be performed, “offset aimpoint sighting”
may be used with objects in the vicinity of the steerpoint that are easily recognizable through the HUD or within
the TGP’s optical sensors, or radar-detectable by the FCR in Ground Map (GM) mode. As the pilot visually acquires
the physical landmark that corresponds with the offset aimpoint, a cursor slew may be applied to the Navigation
cursor to align the Offset Aimpoint Triangle within the HUD symbology over the offset aimpoint location.
Alternatively, if using the TGP to acquire the offset aimpoint, the pilot simply slews the TGP crosshairs over the
offset aimpoint location to perform the intended correction.
   1. Pilot visually recognizes the Offset   2. RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch is                         Offset Aimpoint 1    Target (TGT)
  Aimpoint Triangle in the HUD is offset      used to slew the Offset Aimpoint                            (OA1)
 from a distinct landmark that is used to    Triangle until it is aligned with the
    identify the offset aimpoint location         corresponding landmark                                                         Mission target
                                                                                                             Storage Tank

                                                                                                                   3. Aligning the Offset Aimpoint
                                                                                                                   Triangle with the corresponding
                                                                 Steerpoint (STP)                                  offset landmark aligns the HUD
                                                                                                                   TD Box with the target location


                                                                                     Railroad crossing          3. Aligning the FCR crosshairs with
                                                                                                              the corresponding offset landmark on
                                                                                                               the FCR Ground Map aligns the HUD
                                                                                                                  TD Box with the target location

                                                                                                          HUD TD Box
                                                                        FCR Crosshairs




              Cursor slew correction using “offset aimpoint sighting” through the HUD or FCR

If using the FCR in GM mode, the radar-detectable object corresponding with the sighting point is acquired on
the FCR MFD format. If the FCR crosshairs are not located at the intended sighting point as the pilot studies the
ground radar map, the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch is used to slew the crosshairs onto the sighting point in the
same manner as slewing the TGP crosshairs.
Prior to performing any cursor slew corrections, the pilot must select the intended sighting point with which to
use as a reference. The current sighting point is displayed adjacent to OSB 10 on the FCR and TGP MFD
formats and may be sequenced using the sighting point rotary button (OSB 10). Once the intended sighting
point is selected, the pilot may perform cursor corrections as needed until the HUD symbology or sensor is
aligned with the corresponding sighting point.
The F-16 also includes several specialized sighting modes that may be used in conjunction with “Pre-planned”
weapon delivery sub-modes.
     •      Visual Reference Point and Visual Initial Point sighting modes allow the pilot to perform last minute
            corrections to the alignment of the HUD symbology with regard to expected target location, typically
            prior to commencing a low-level ingress to a pop-up attack maneuver.
     •      Snowplow sighting mode allows the pilot to rapidly reposition the SPI directly in front of the aircraft.
            Snowplow may also be used in Navigation master mode if the FCR is set to GM, GMT, or SEA modes.
Sighting Point Options
Sighting points may only be utilized when employing “Pre-planned” weapon delivery sub-modes. However, some
sighting point options are limited to specific steerpoint ranges or are only available in VIP or VRP modes.
The pilot may select a different sighting point by pressing the sighting point rotary at OSB 10 on the FCR format
when the FCR is set to GM, GMT, or SEA modes, or on the TGP format. Each time the sighting point rotary is
pressed, the selection will advance to the next available sighting point within the list in a cyclic fashion, eventually
returning to the first selection.




                                        Sighting Point Rotary (OSB 10)

The pilot may also use TMS Right-Short when the SOI is set to HUD or FCR to advance to the next sighting point.
Steerpoint/Target (STP/TGT)
The selected steerpoint is used in a “direct sighting” method, where the physical location or target that
corresponds with the steerpoint is identified by the aircraft sensors or visually by the pilot through the HUD/HMCS.
The cursor is slewed as necessary until the Steerpoint Diamond or Target Designator (TD) Box is directly over
the physical steerpoint location or target to provide accurate navigation alignment or steering to the weapon
release point.
        STP. The steerpoint is used as a location reference and is represented by the Steerpoint Diamond within
        the HUD and HMCS symbology, under any of the following conditions.
        •     Master mode is set to NAV.
        •     Master mode is set to A-G and the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to MAN (Manual bombing).
        •     Master mode is set to A-G, the selected weapon profile on the SMS page is set to AG88 (AGM-88
              HARM missiles), and the HARM mode is set to HAS (HARM-As-Sensor).
        TGT. The steerpoint is used as a target and is represented by the Target Designator (TD) Box within the
        HUD and HMCS symbology, under any of the following conditions.
        •     Master mode is set to A-G and the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-
              BORE, or PRE.
        •     Master mode is set to A-G, the selected weapon profile on the SMS page is set to AG88 (AGM-88
              HARM missiles), and the HARM mode is set to POS (Position Known).
Offset Aimpoint (OA1/OA2)
A known location near the steerpoint is used in an “offset aimpoint sighting” method, where a distinct landmark
that is easily identified by the aircraft sensors or recognizable by the pilot through the HUD/HMCS is calculated
to be at a precise range and bearing from the steerpoint. An Offset Aimpoint Triangle symbol is displayed at the
calculated range and bearing relative to the Steerpoint Diamond or Target Designator (TD) Box.
The cursor is slewed as necessary until the Offset Aimpoint Triangle is directly over the physical landmark that
corresponds with the offset aimpoint location, which will in turn ensure the Steerpoint Diamond or TD Box is
directly over the physical steerpoint location or target to provide accurate navigation alignment or steering to the
weapon release point.
       OA1/OA2. The offset aimpoint is used as a location reference and is represented by the Offset Aimpoint
       Triangle when the corresponding sighting point is selected, under any of the following conditions.
        •     Master mode is set to NAV, S-J, or E-J.
        •     Master mode is set to A-G and the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-
              BORE, PRE, or MAN (Manual bombing).
        •     Master mode is set to A-G, the selected weapon profile on the SMS page is set to AG88 (AGM-88
              HARM missiles), and the HARM mode is set to HAS (HARM-As-Sensor) or POS (Position Known).
       OA1/OA2 are only available as sighting points for steerpoints 1-25, and only under the following conditions.
        •     FIX, A-CAL, and Snowplow (SP) are not selected.
        •     The offset aimpoint range from the steerpoint has been programmed with a value greater than “0”.
Initial Point (IP)
The selected steerpoint is a known location used as an initial point that is visually recognizable by the pilot through
the HUD/HMCS during a low-level attack against a target that is calculated to be at a precise range and bearing
from the steerpoint. The steerpoint is used as the IP when in Visual Initial Point (VIP) mode.
The cursor is slewed as necessary until the Steerpoint Diamond is directly over the physical steerpoint location,
or the IP is overflown and designated by TMS Forward, which will in turn ensure the Target Designator (TD) Box
is directly over the physical target to provide accurate steering to the weapon release point.
        IP. The steerpoint is used as an initial point and is represented by the Steerpoint Diamond within the
        HUD and HMCS symbology, under the following conditions.
        •     Master mode is set to A-G, the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE,
              PRE, or MAN, and VIP mode is enabled for the selected steerpoint.
NOTE: If the selected steerpoint is changed to a different steerpoint than that entered on the VIP-TO-TGT DED
page, the Initial Point sighting point option will be removed.
Reference Point (RP)
The selected steerpoint is a known location used as a target during a low-level attack and a distinct landmark
that is visually recognizable by the pilot through the HUD/HMCS is calculated to be at a precise range and bearing
from the steerpoint. The landmark is used as the RP when in Visual Reference Point (VRP) mode.
The cursor is slewed as necessary until the Steerpoint Diamond is directly over the physical landmark that
corresponds with the reference point location, or the RP is overflown and designated by TMS Forward, which will
in turn ensure the Target Designator (TD) Box is directly over the physical target to provide accurate steering to
the weapon release point.
        RP. The reference point is used as a visual reference and is represented by the Steerpoint Diamond within
        the HUD and HMCS symbology, under the following conditions.
        •     Master mode is set to A-G, the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE,
              PRE, or MAN, and VRP mode is enabled for the selected steerpoint.
NOTE: If the selected steerpoint is changed to a different steerpoint than that entered on the TGT-TO-VRP DED
page, the Reference Point sighting point option will be removed.
Cursor Slewing
Any time the pilot performs a “cursor slew” in which corrections or adjustments are being made to the steerpoint
location, the TD Box, or the HUD Mark Cue, the pilot is affecting one of 7 independent cursors. Only one cursor
may be controlled by the pilot (using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip) at any given time.
The cursor that is controlled by the pilot is dependent on the current master mode, weapon delivery sub-mode,
and Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI).
After a cursor has been slewed, the accumulated slew inputs are retained for that cursor independently of the
others through changes of the master mode or weapon delivery sub-mode. As an example, if the Navigation
cursor had not been slewed prior to entering VIP mode, but the VIP cursor was subsequently slewed as the pilot
approached the IP during a low-level attack, the Navigation cursor would remain unaffected with no slews applied.
In addition, if the selected steerpoint is changed while any aircraft sensor is tracking a ground target, the sensor
will break track to prevent excessive cursor slews from being applied from the newly selected steerpoint. This
will cause the FCR to break track if set to GM, GMT, or SEA modes, the TGP to break track if in A-G mode, or any
designated radar emitter on the HAD MFD format to be undesignated.
Navigation Cursor
The Navigation cursor applies navigation corrections to all steerpoints at the same time without changing the
system navigation solution or performing an update to the INS itself. (See Sighting Points and Cursor Corrections
for more information.)
The Navigation cursor may be slewed when the FCR or TGP are set as SOI under any of the following conditions.
     •    Master mode is set to NAV, S-J, or E-J.
     •    Master mode is set to A-G and the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE,
          PRE, or MAN (Manual bombing).
     •    Master mode is set to A-G, the selected weapon profile on the SMS page is set to AG88 (AGM-88 HARM
          missiles), and the HARM mode is set to HAS (HARM-As-Sensor) or POS (Position Known).
VIP & VRP Cursors
The VIP and VRP cursors apply navigation corrections to the selected steerpoint when in VIP or VRP modes,
respectively, without affecting the Navigation cursor or changing the navigation solution or performing an update
to the INS itself. (See Visual Reference Point (VRP) & Visual Initial Point (VIP) for more information.)
The VIP cursor may be slewed when the HUD, FCR, or TGP are set as SOI under the following conditions.
     •    Master mode is set to A-G, Visual Initial Point (VIP) mode is enabled for the selected steerpoint, and
          the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, PRE, or MAN.
The VRP cursor may be slewed when the HUD, FCR, or TGP are set as SOI under the following conditions.
     •    Master mode is set to A-G, Visual Reference Point (VRP) mode is enabled for the selected steerpoint,
          and the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, PRE, or MAN.
Markpoint Cursor
The Markpoint cursor applies movement to the HUD Mark Cue within the HUD symbology when using the HUD
method to create a markpoint. (See DED MARK page in The F-16C Viper chapter for more information.)
The Markpoint cursor may be slewed when the HUD is SOI under the following conditions.
     •    The MARK DED page is displayed the Mark method has been set to “HUD”.
HMCS Cursor
The HMCS cursor applies movement to the TD Box or the HUD Mark Cue within the HMCS symbology. (See DED
MARK page in the F-16C Viper chapter for more information.)
The HMCS cursor may be slewed when the HMCS is SOI under any of the following conditions.
     •    Master mode is set to A-G and the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to DTOS, EO-VIS, or VIS.
     •    The MARK DED page is displayed the Mark method has been set to “HUD”.
Visual Cursor
The Visual cursor applies movement to the Target Designator (TD) Box within the HUD symbology when
performing air-to-ground targeting against targets that are visually identified by the pilot through the canopy or
the targeting pod sensor video, independently of pre-planned steerpoints. (See “Visual” Weapon Delivery Sub-
modes for more information.)
The Visual cursor may be slewed when the HUD or TGP are SOI under the following conditions.
     •    Master mode is set to A-G and the weapon delivery sub-mode is set to DTOS, EO-VIS, or VIS.
Snowplow Cursor
The Snowplow cursor is located at a fixed range in front of the aircraft and is used to direct the aircraft sensors
forward of the aircraft’s flight path. The Snowplow cursor itself cannot be slewed by the pilot, but its position
relative to the aircraft may be modified. See Snowplow Sighting Method on the following page for more
information.


Cursor Zero (CZ)
Cursor slews may be removed entirely by pressing the
Cursor Zero (CZ) button, which is displayed at OSB 9 on
the FCR or TGP MFD formats, or OSB 10 on the HSD MFD
format.
     •    If the Navigation cursor, VIP cursor, or VRP
          cursor have accumulated any cursor slews, the
          CZ OSB option will be displayed on the
          relevant MFD formats to indicate that cursor
          corrections have been input into the system.
     •    If the Navigation cursor, VIP cursor, or VRP
          cursor cursors have not accumulated any
          cursor slews, or the cursor slews are removed
          using Cursor Zero, the CZ OSB option will be
          removed and not displayed on the relevant
          MFD formats.
     •    The CZ OSB option will only zeroize the
          accumulated slews of the cursor that is
          currently being controlled by the pilot.
As an example, if the Navigation cursor was slewed prior to entering VIP mode, and the VIP cursor was
subsequently slewed as the pilot approached the IP; if the pilot were to press the CZ OSB option, the VIP cursor
would be zeroized but the Navigation cursor would remain unaffected. In this situation, if the Navigation cursor
was intended to be zeroized, the pilot would need to exit VIP mode and return to a master mode and/or weapon
delivery sub-mode in which the Navigation cursor is affected and then press the CZ OSB option.
     •    Zeroizing the Navigation cursor removes cursor slews from all steerpoints.
     •    Zeroizing the VIP cursor while in VIP mode removes cursor slews from the selected VIP steerpoint.
     •    Zeroizing the VRP cursor while in VRP mode removes cursor slews from the selected VRP steerpoint.
Hands-On Cursor Zero
If a targeting pod is installed, powered, and operational, Cursor Zero may be alternatively commanded from the
Side Stick Controller (SSC) by pressing TMS Aft when both of the following criteria are met:
     •    The TGP MFD format is the Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI).
     •    The TGP is in SLAVE mode (i.e., not in POINT or AREA track).
Snowplow Sighting Mode
Snowplow mode allows the pilot to rapidly reposition the
System-Point-of-Interest (SPI) ahead of the aircraft
when using a “Pre-planned” weapon delivery sub-mode
or when in Navigation master mode.
In situations when it is desirable to use a “Pre-planned”
weapon delivery sub-mode against a target that is not
designated by a steerpoint, Snowplow allows the pilot to
hastily slew the selected steerpoint to a fixed location
directly in front of the aircraft and then ground stabilize
the steerpoint at its current location.
Snowplow mode may be enabled by pressing the
Snowplow (SP) button, which is displayed at OSB 8 on
the FCR or TGP MFD formats in NAV or A-G master
modes when the FCR is set to GM, GMT, or SEA radar
modes, and VIP and VRP sighting modes are not enabled
for the selected steerpoint.
When Snowplow is enabled, the SPI is assigned to the
Snowplow cursor, which corresponds with a fixed
location directly in front of the aircraft.



                                                       Snowplow cursor located at 50%
                                                       of the selected FCR range setting




                                   FCR crosshairs and TGP directed                   SPI
                                   at System-Point-of-Interest (SPI)




                                           Snowplow Sighting Method

The Snowplow cursor is placed in three dimensions based on the following.
•    Aircraft Heading. The Snowplow cursor will always remain stabilized with the aircraft centerline and cannot
     be changed. The Snowplow cursor (and the SPI) will turn with the aircraft nose and cannot be moved in the
     lateral axis.
•    Range. The Snowplow cursor will be located along the aircraft centerline at 50% of the FCR’s selected
     range setting, placing the SPI within the center of the MFD FCR format. The pilot may indirectly move the
     Snowplow cursor along the longitudinal axis by selecting a different FCR range setting, even if the FCR is in
     STBY mode or if the RF switch is in QUIET or SILENT positions.
     If the FCR is powered OFF on the SNSR PWR control panel, the Snowplow cursor will be placed at a range
     of 5 NM in front of the aircraft, which cannot be changed.
•    Elevation. The Snowplow cursor is set to the same elevation as the selected steerpoint, independently of
     the actual terrain elevation below it. The pilot may indirectly move the Snowplow cursor in the vertical axis
     by modifying the elevation of the selected steerpoint on the STPT DED page.
     When the aircraft is weight-on-wheels, the Snowplow cursor is set to the same elevation as the aircraft.
When Snowplow is enabled in pre-designate, it may be exited with or without designating (post-designate), or
will be disabled automatically if any of the following criteria are met:
•    The selected steerpoint is changed.
•    VIP or VRP sighting modes are entered.
•    FIX or A-CAL pages are displayed on the DED.
•    The FCR is set to AGR mode, which occurs automatically if a “Visual” weapon delivery sub-mode is entered,
     such as CCIP, STRF, DTOS, STRF, EO-VIS, or VIS; or if the MARK page is displayed on the DED with “HUD”
     as the selected marking method.
•    The FCR is set to CRM or ACM mode, which occurs automatically when entering MSL or DGFT master modes.
Exiting Snowplow via Post-Designate
When Snowplow is enabled, the SPI may be ground stabilized by pressing TMS Forward               Target Management
while the HUD, FCR, or TGP is set as SOI. When this occurs, the selected steerpoint will           Switch (4-way)

be stabilized at that location, incurring a slew to the Navigation cursor, and the
steerpoint elevation will be adjusted to the calculated terrain elevation.
Ground stabilizing the SPI in this manner will automatically exit Snowplow sighting
mode.
Exiting Snowplow from Pre-Designate
When Snowplow is enabled, the SPI may be returned to the previous steerpoint location
without designation by pressing TMS Aft while the HUD, FCR, or TGP is set as SOI; or
by pressing SP (OSB 8) on the FCR or TGP formats. When this occurs, Snowplow mode
will be exited without incurring a slew to the Navigation cursor.
Pressing CZ on the FCR, TGP, or HSD MFD formats while Snowplow mode is enabled
will exit Snowplow sighting mode but will not zeroize any slews that had been
accumulated by the Navigation cursor prior to enabling Snowplow.


“Visual” Weapon Delivery Sub-modes
Attacks against targets of opportunity, independently of steerpoints, may be performed after the pilot has visually
acquired and identified the physical target within the HUD or HMCS, or via electronic sensors such as the targeting
pod (TGP). In these weapon delivery sub-modes, the target location is either manually designated by the pilot
using the Target Designator (TD) Box, or the computed weapon ballistics are calculated from the aircraft’s current
position and the aircraft is maneuvered in such a way to place the weapon ballistic solution over the target itself.
(See the Air-to-Ground Employment chapter for more information regarding each weapon delivery sub-mode.)
“Visual” weapon delivery sub-modes, such as CCIP, DTOS, or STRF, rely on the pilot to visually identify the target
through the canopy before maneuvering the aircraft to engage the target. Since target acquisition is not reliant
on pre-planned steerpoints or the position accuracy of the system navigation solution within the INU, these sub-
modes do not utilize sighting points. As such, sighting point options are not displayed at OSB 10 on the FCR and
TGP MFD formats when a “Visual” weapon delivery sub-mode is in use.
VISUAL REFERENCE POINT (VRP) & VISUAL
INITIAL POINT (VIP) SIGHTING MODES
Although the F-16C is quite capable of performing precision strikes against pre-planned targets designated by a
steerpoint, conducting such attacks following a low-level ingress can be quite challenging in that the target may
not be visible until just prior to weapons release. This is compounded by the possibility that the target itself may
be concealed, camouflaged, or may be difficult to acquire during the final critical moments of a low-level pop-up
maneuver. Two additional sighting modes are available that allow the pilot to use visual landmarks from which
to commence the attack, perform final alignment of the targeting solution just prior to the attack, and utilize
visual cues within the HUD symbology for the location and timing of the pop-up maneuver during the attack itself.




Visual Reference Point (VRP). The steerpoint is used to designate a known target location (TGT). In this
sighting mode, a visually identifiable location is used as a Reference Point (RP), located relative to the TGT, as a
visual cue to the pilot for aligning the aircraft flight path for the attack sequence, ensure the targeting solution is
accurate prior to commencing the attack, or to aid in target acquisition during the attack itself.
A pre-planned Pull-Up Point (PUP), located relative to the TGT, may be employed to provide a visual cue to the
pilot as to when to initiate a pop-up maneuver following the low-level ingress.
Visual Initial Point (VIP). The steerpoint is used to designate a known, visually identifiable location as the
Initial Point (IP) from which to initiate an attack against a target (TGT) that may not be easily seen or detected,
or which the precise location may not be known. In this sighting mode, the pilot may use the steerpoint at the
IP, or offset aimpoints (OA1/OA2) relative to the IP, to ensure the targeting solution is accurate just prior to
commencing the attack.
A pre-planned Pull-Up Point (PUP), located relative to the IP, may be employed to provide a visual cue to the
pilot as to when to initiate a pop-up maneuver following the low-level ingress.
NOTE: VRP and VIP sighting modes may only be simultaneously enabled for separate steerpoints. Each sighting
mode is mutually exclusive; enabling one sighting mode for the same steerpoint will disable the other.
Visual Reference Point (VRP) Sighting Mode
VRP is a sighting mode used in conjunction with “Pre-planned” weapon delivery sub-modes (such as CCRP or
LADD) that provides the pilot with additional visual cues and hands-on designation options for performing level,
toss, or pop-up dive attacks from a low-altitude ingress. A steerpoint is plotted at the target, and a landmark that
is easily identifiable by the pilot while performing low-altitude flight or the pop-up maneuver itself is subsequently
plotted relative to that steerpoint. The pilot may use this visual landmark for aligning the aircraft flight path for
the final attack maneuvers, correcting any misalignments of the HUD symbology before committing to the attack
sequence, or orienting the aircraft relative to the target to aid in target acquisition during the attack itself.
                   If necessary, the pilot may perform                 Pilot may visually identify      Pilot confirms the
                     an overfly designation of the RP,                the physical target through    Target Designator (TD)
                       which shifts the SPI to TGT                      the canopy at the apex        Box is over the target


    Pilot visually identifies               Pilot initiates a climb                                                      Pilot aligns Azimuth
  reference landmark at RP                  at the Pull-Up Point                                                          Steering Line (ASL)
  from which to initiate the                                             OA2                                            and releases munitions
   pop-up attack sequence




                      RP                                                                                                 TGT
                                      PUP
                                                                                                                                      OA1


                                                      Offset aimpoint may be used                         Offset aimpoint may be used to
                                                      to mark the Pull-Down Point                         visually orient pilot to the target
                                                       within the HUD symbology                              or mark a radar-identifiable
                                                                                                           object on the FCR Ground Map

                                                              VRP Sighting Mode

VRP sighting mode is entered when all of the following criteria are met:
      •      The master mode is set to A-G.
      •      The weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, or PRE.
      •      The TGT steerpoint set on the TGT-TO-VRP DED page is the selected steerpoint.
      •      VRP is enabled on the TGT-TO-VRP DED page.
When VRP sighting mode is entered, the EHSI and Azimuth Steering Line (ASL) will display steering to the Target
(TGT), the sighting point rotary will automatically be set to TGT, and the SOI will automatically move to the HUD.
If the pilot intends to use the RP as a sighting point prior to the attack, RP must be manually selected.
The pilot may correct any misalignments of the HUD symbology using either of the following methods:
      •      Slew the Steerpoint Diamond over the landmark at the RP using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch with
             the HUD, FCR, or TGP as SOI.
      •      Designate the RP using TMS Forward with the HUD as SOI while performing a direct overflight of the
             landmark itself. When TMS Forward is pressed, the sighting point rotary will sequence to TGT.
Regardless of which method the pilot uses to align the HUD symbology, any misalignments of the HUD symbology
as a result of the system navigation solution will be effectively corrected. This will ensure the Target Designator
(TD) Box will be placed over the corresponding target location and the weapon release symbology will be
accurately calculated to the target location during the final moments of the attack sequence; assuming the
Reference Point location has been accurately plotted on the TGT-TO-VRP DED page.
In the figure below and on the previous page, attack geometry has been pre-planned with the Reference Point
input via the TGT-TO-VRP DED page, and an optional Pull-Up Point has been input via the TGT-TO-PUP DED
page. The PUP is a location from where a pop-up diving attack is initiated from low altitude. Pull-Up Points must
be plotted at a location that provides sufficient maneuver space and time for the pilot to perform the pop-up
maneuver, roll over for a subsequent “pull-down” maneuver, visually acquire the target, align the aircraft for
weapons release, and then perform a safe-escape maneuver prior to reaching minimum safe altitude.
                                                                                                                    Target



          Visual
      Reference Point
                                 Pull-Up
                                  Point
           34 ft                        -10 ft                                    Nautical Miles (NM) to Feet (ft) = [NM] x 6,076
        (above TGT)                  (below TGT)                                  Kilometers (km) to Feet (ft) = [km] x 3,280

                                         Plotting TGT-to-VRP and TGT-to-PUP

When PUP is enabled and the TGT steerpoint set on the TGT-TO-VRP DED page is the selected steerpoint, a
circle will be displayed within the HUD at the corresponding location. If the circle is outside of the HUD field-of-
view, the circle will be displayed along the edge of the HUD symbology and will be overlayed with an ×.


                                                                                                        Offset Aimpoint at
                                                                                                         Pull-Down Point




               Offset Aimpoint
                                                                                                        Pull-Up Point (PUP)

              TD Box at Target
              (TGT) steerpoint
                                                                                                        Reference Point (RP)



                                                                                                        Slant range to Target
                                                                                                           (TGT) steerpoint




                                                               Relative Bearing      Range (NM) to
                                           VRP sighting mode   to Target (TGT)        Target (TGT)



When VRP sighting mode is enabled, all sighting point symbols and the pull-up point will be displayed within the
HUD and HMCS symbology, regardless of the sight point that is in use.
      Target (TGT), at             the      TGT                    Offset Aimpoint (OA1/OA2), as input on the DEST
      steerpoint location.                                         OA1/OA2 DED pages, for the selected steerpoint.
      Reference Point (RP), as input                               Pull-Up Point (PUP), as input on the TGT-TO-PUP
      on the TGT-TO-VRP DED page.                                  DED page, if enabled.
If the selected steerpoint or master mode is changed, any cursor slews that have been accumulated by the VRP
cursor will be retained. Upon returning to VRP sighting mode, an overfly designation of the RP may be performed,
if necessary, regardless of whether an overfly designation had been performed prior to exiting VRP mode.
If VRP mode is disabled and then re-enabled on the TGT-TO-VRP DED page, any cursor slews that have been
accumulated by the VRP cursor will be zeroed and VRP sighting mode will be reset to a pre-designate state.
TGT-TO-VRP DED Page
The Target-To-VRP DED page is accessed by pressing 8/FIX on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is
displayed. This page allows the pilot to select the TGT steerpoint and modify the position of the Visual Reference
Point (VRP) relative to the location of the TGT steerpoint.
                                            1. VRP Mode Select

               2. Target Steerpoint
                                                                                                               6. DED Asterisks
             3. True Bearing to VRP

                    4. Range to VRP

             5. Elevation difference
                   from Target


                                                                                                  Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                                     Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                   Reject
                                                                                    Return DED                                Cycle DED to
                                   Accept                                           to CNI page                             TGT-TO-PUP page

                               Enable

                         Operate                     Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                  to the next data field


1.   VRP Mode Select. Enables/disables VRP sighting mode by placing the DED asterisks around the data field
     and pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad, which will highlight the text within the data field when
     VRP mode is enabled.
     NOTE: Enabling VRP does not enter VRP sighting mode. VRP sighting mode will only be entered if VRP is
     enabled, the VRP steerpoint set on this page is the selected steerpoint, the master mode is set to A-G, and
     the weapon delivery sub-mode is CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, PRE, or MAN.
2.   Target Steerpoint (TGT). Displays the steerpoint used as the Target (TGT) when VRP mode is entered.
     The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks
     may be placed over the data field and a steerpoint number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by
     ENTR.
     NOTE: VRP sighting cannot be simultaneously enabled for the same steerpoint as VIP. If a steerpoint is set
     as the TGT steerpoint and as the VIP steerpoint, pressing 0/M-SEL to enable VRP will disable VIP.
3.   True Bearing to VRP (TBRG). Displays the relative bearing (in degrees true) from the TGT steerpoint to
     the VRP. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP
     keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Range to VRP (RNG). Displays the range (in feet) from the TGT steerpoint to the VRP. May be modified
     by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   Elevation difference from TGT (ELEV). Displays the difference in elevation (in feet) of the VRP from the
     TGT steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using
     the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. To enter a negative value, press 0/M-SEL to enter a leading zero, which
     will be input as a negative (–) symbol, followed by the numerical elevation difference value.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
TGT-TO-PUP DED Page
The TGT-to-Pull-Up Point DED page is accessed by pressing 8/FIX on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page
is displayed, which displays the TGT-TO-VRP DED page, followed by momentarily pressing the DCS switch to the
SEQ position. This page allows the pilot to select the TGT steerpoint and modify the position of the Pull-Up Point
(PUP) relative to the location of the TGT steerpoint steerpoint.
                                               1. PUP Mode Select

                      2. TGT Steerpoint
                                                                                                                 6. DED Asterisks
            3. True Bearing from TGT

                    4. Range from TGT

                         5. Elevation
                    difference from TGT


                                                                                                   Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                                       Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                                     Return DED                                Cycle DED to
                                      Accept                                                                                 TGT-TO-VRP page
                                                                                     to CNI page

                                 Enable

                            Operate                   Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                   to the next data field


1.   PUP Mode Select. Enables/disables display of the PUP symbol by placing the DED asterisks around the
     data field and pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad, which will highlight the text within the data
     field when PUP is enabled.
2.   TGT Steerpoint. Displays the steerpoint used as the Target (TGT) when VRP mode is entered. The ICP
     Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks may be
     placed over the data field and a steerpoint number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
     NOTE: VRP sighting cannot be simultaneously enabled for the same steerpoint as VIP. If a steerpoint is set
     as the TGT steerpoint and as the VIP steerpoint, pressing 0/M-SEL to enable VRP will disable VIP.
3.   True Bearing to VRP (TBRG). Displays the relative bearing (in degrees true) from the TGT steerpoint to
     the PUP. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP
     keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Range to VRP (RNG). Displays the range (in feet) from the TGT steerpoint to the PUP. May be modified
     by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
5.   Elevation difference from TGT (ELEV). Displays the difference in elevation (in feet) of the PUP from the
     TGT steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using
     the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. To enter a negative value, press 0/M-SEL to enter a leading zero, which
     will be input as a negative (–) symbol, followed by the numerical elevation difference value.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Designating the RP using Direct Overflight
If VRP sighting mode is entered and the HUD is SOI, a direct overflight and designation of the RP may be used
to simultaneously align the HUD symbology for the attack and sequence the sighting point rotary to TGT.
To perform an overfly designation of the RP,
ensure VRP has been enabled on the TGT-TO-        7. Sub-mode (OSB 2)                    6. Weapon (OSB 6)
VRP DED page, and perform the following:
1.   ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker –
     Select the VRP steerpoint number.
     or
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 4/STPT to display
     the STPT DED page.
2.   ICP Keypad – Input the VRP steerpoint
     number.
3.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the
     steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
4.   ICP A-G Button – Press to enter A-G
     master mode.
5.   MFD format – Select SMS.
6.   SMS OSB 6 – Select weapon, as desired.
     Verify or modify SMS profile settings for
     the selected weapon, as necessary.
7.   SMS OSB 2 – Select pre-planned weapon                              5. SMS (OSB 12-14)
     delivery sub-mode, as desired (CCRP,
     LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, or PRE).
                                                  8. SOI set to HUD                          10. FPM aligned for direct
8.   DMS Forward – Press to set SOI to HUD,                                                   overflight of RP location
     if necessary.
9.   Visually acquire the physical landmark
     that corresponds with the Reference
     Point (RP) location.
10. Maneuver the aircraft as necessary to
    align the Flight Path Marker (FPM) for a       9. RP location is
    direct overflight of the RP location.          visually acquired
                                                    (road junction)
11. TMS Forward-Short – Press when directly
    over the landmark at the RP location.
When TMS Forward-Short is pressed, the VRP
cursor will be immediately slewed to place the
RP directly below the aircraft, which will slew
the Target (TGT) steerpoint, Pull-Up Point
(PUP), and offset aimpoints (OA1/OA2) an
equal distance and direction to align the HUD
symbology for the attack.
Aligning the RP using VRP Cursor Slew
If VRP sighting mode is entered and the HUD, FCR, or TGP are SOI, the VRP cursor may be slewed to align the
HUD symbology for the attack.
To align the HUD symbology by slewing the
VRP cursor, ensure VRP has been enabled on        7. Sub-mode (OSB 2)                    6. Weapon (OSB 6)
the TGT-TO-VRP DED page, and perform the
following:
1.   ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker –
     Select the VRP steerpoint number.
     or
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 4/STPT to display
     the STPT DED page.
2.   ICP Keypad – Input the VRP steerpoint
     number.
3.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the
     steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
4.   ICP A-G Button – Press to enter A-G
     master mode.
5.   MFD format – Select SMS.
6.   SMS OSB 6 – Select weapon, as desired.
     Verify or modify SMS profile settings for
     the selected weapon, as necessary.
                                                                        5. SMS (OSB 12-14)
7.   SMS OSB 2 – Select pre-planned weapon
     delivery sub-mode, as desired (CCRP,
     LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, or PRE).               8. SOI set to HUD                     11. VRP cursor is slewed to
                                                                                          align the Diamond symbol
8.   DMS Forward – Press to set SOI to HUD,                                                   with the RP location

     if necessary.
9.   (Optional) TMS Right – Press as
     necessary to sequence the sighting point
     rotary to Reference Point (RP).
     NOTE: Although it is not required to          10. RP location is
     select RP as the sighting point before        visually acquired
     slewing the VRP cursor, the cursor slew        (road junction)
     rates will be scaled in a manner that will
     permit greater precision in aligning the
     Diamond symbol over the RP location.
10. Visually acquire the physical landmark
    that corresponds with the RP location.
11. RDR CURSOR/ENABLE Switch – Slew the
    VRP cursor as necessary to align the
    Diamond symbol over the RP location.
12. TMS Right – Press to sequence the
    sighting point rotary to TGT, if necessary.
Visual Initial Point (VIP) Sighting Mode
VIP is a sighting mode used in conjunction with “Pre-planned” weapon delivery sub-modes (such as CCRP or
LADD) that provides the pilot with additional visual cues and hands-on designation options for performing level,
toss, or pop-up dive attacks from a low-altitude ingress. A steerpoint is plotted at a landmark that is easily
identifiable by the pilot while performing low-altitude flight, and a target location is subsequently plotted relative
to that steerpoint. The pilot may use this visual landmark to align the aircraft flight path for the final attack
maneuvers or to correct any misalignments of the HUD symbology before committing to the attack sequence.
                           Pilot performs an overfly                      Pilot may visually identify      Pilot confirms the
                           designation of IP; EHSI                       the physical target through    Target Designator (TD)
                        steering and SPI shifts to TGT                     the canopy at the apex        Box is over the target


    Pilot visually identifies                  Pilot initiates a climb                                                      Pilot aligns Azimuth
  landmark at IP steerpoint                    at the Pull-Up Point                                                          Steering Line (ASL)
                                                                            OA2                                            and releases munitions




                        IP                                                                                                 TGT
                                         PUP
           OA1


          Offset aimpoint may be used to                 Offset aimpoint may be used
            visually orient pilot to IP or               to mark the Pull-Down Point
          mark a radar-identifiable object                within the HUD symbology
              on the FCR Ground Map

                                                                  VIP Sighting Mode

VIP sighting mode is entered when all of the following criteria are met:
      •        The master mode is set to A-G.
      •        The weapon delivery sub-mode is set to CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, or PRE.
      •        The VIP steerpoint set on the VIP-TO-TGT DED page is the selected steerpoint.
      •        VIP mode is enabled on the VIP-TO-TGT DED page.
When VIP sighting mode is entered, the EHSI will display steering to the Initial Point (IP), the Azimuth Steering
Line will display steering to the Target (TGT), the sighting point rotary will automatically be set to IP, and the
SOI will automatically move to the HUD.
The pilot may correct any misalignments of the HUD symbology by designating the IP using TMS Forward with
the HUD as SOI while performing a direct overflight of the landmark itself. When TMS Forward is pressed, the
EHSI steering will switch to the Target (TGT), the sighting point rotary will sequence to TGT, and the SOI will
automatically move to the FCR MFD format (if displayed).
When the IP location is accurately designated during overflight, any misalignments of the HUD symbology as a
result of the system navigation solution will be effectively corrected. This will ensure the Target Designator (TD)
Box will be placed over the corresponding target location and the weapon release symbology will be accurately
calculated to the target location during the final moments of the attack sequence; assuming the Target location
has been accurately plotted on the VIP-TO-TGT DED page.
In the figures above and on the following page, attack geometry has been pre-planned with the Target input via
the VIP-TO-TGT DED page, and an optional Pull-Up Point has been input via the VIP-TO-PUP DED page.
The PUP is a location from where a pop-up diving attack is initiated from low altitude. Pull-Up Points must be
plotted at a location that provides sufficient maneuver space and time for the pilot to perform the pop-up
maneuver, roll over for a subsequent “pull-down” maneuver, visually acquire the target, align the aircraft for
weapons release, and then perform a safe-escape maneuver prior to reaching minimum safe altitude.
                                                                                                                     Target



           Visual                                                                                                    -34 ft
        Initial Point                                                                                             (below VIP)
                                                   Pull-Up
                        80.0°T / 2.5 NM             Point
                                             -44 ft                               Feet (ft) to Nautical Miles (NM) = [ft] ÷ 6,076
                                          (below VIP)                             Kilometers (km) to Nautical Miles (NM) = [km] ÷ 1.85

                                            Plotting VIP-to-TGT and VIP-to-PUP

When PUP is enabled and the VIP steerpoint on the VIP-TO-TGT DED page is the selected steerpoint, a circle will
be displayed within the HUD at the corresponding location of the Pull-Up Point. If the circle is outside of the HUD
field-of-view, the circle will be displayed along the edge of the HUD symbology and will be overlayed with an ×.


                                                                                                          Offset Aimpoint at
                                                                                                           Pull-Down Point




             Offset Aimpoint
                                                                                                          Pull-Up Point (PUP)

      TD Box at Target (TGT)

                                                                                                          Initial Point (IP) at
                                                                                                            VIP steerpoint



                                                                                                           Slant range to Initial Point
                                                                                                          (IP) prior to VIP designation




                                                               Relative Bearing      Range (NM) to
                                           VIP sighting mode   to Target (TGT)        Target (TGT)



When VIP sighting mode is enabled, all sighting point symbols and the pull-up point will be displayed within the
HUD and HMCS symbology, regardless of the sight point that is in use.
      Initial Point (IP), at the VIP                              Offset Aimpoint (OA1/OA2), as input on the DEST
      steerpoint location.                                        OA1/OA2 DED pages, for the selected steerpoint.
      Target (TGT), as input on the                               Pull-Up Point (PUP), as input on the VIP-TO-PUP
      VIP-TO-TGT DED page.                                        DED page, if enabled.
If the selected steerpoint or master mode is changed, any cursor slews that have been accumulated by the VIP
cursor will be retained. Upon returning to VIP sighting mode, an overfly designation of the IP may be performed,
if necessary, regardless of whether an overfly designation had been performed prior to exiting VIP mode.
If VIP mode is disabled and then re-enabled on the VIP-TO-TGT DED page, any cursor slews that have been
accumulated by the VIP cursor will be zeroed and VIP sighting mode will be reset to a pre-designate state.
VIP-TO-TGT DED Page
The VIP-to-Target DED page is accessed by pressing 3 on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is displayed.
This page allows the pilot to select the VIP steerpoint and modify the position of the Target (TGT) relative to the
location of the VIP steerpoint.
                                              1. VIP Mode Select

                      2. VIP Steerpoint
                                                                                                                6. DED Asterisks
            3. True Bearing from VIP

                    4. Range from VIP

                        5. Elevation
                    difference from VIP


                                                                                                  Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                                      Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                     Reject
                                                                                    Return DED                                Cycle DED to
                                     Accept                                         to CNI page                             VIP-TO-PUP page

                                 Enable

                           Operate                   Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                  to the next data field


1.   VIP Mode Select. Enables/disables VIP sighting mode by placing the DED asterisks around the data field
     and pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad, which will highlight the text within the data field when
     VIP mode is enabled.
     NOTE: Enabling VIP does not enter VIP sighting mode. VIP sighting mode will only be entered if VIP is
     enabled, the VIP steerpoint set on this page is the selected steerpoint, the master mode is set to A-G, and
     the weapon delivery sub-mode is CCRP, LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, PRE, or MAN.
2.   VIP Steerpoint. Displays the steerpoint used as the Initial Point (IP) when VIP mode is entered. The ICP
     Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks may be
     placed over the data field and a steerpoint number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
     NOTE: VIP sighting cannot be simultaneously enabled for the same steerpoint as VRP. If a steerpoint is set
     as the VIP steerpoint and as the TGT steerpoint, pressing 0/M-SEL to enable VIP will disable VRP.
3.   True Bearing to TGT (TBRG). Displays the relative bearing (in degrees true) from the VIP steerpoint to
     the TGT. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP
     keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Range from to TGT (RNG). Displays the range (in nautical miles) from the VIP steerpoint to the TGT.
     May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad,
     and pressing ENTR.
5.   Elevation difference from VIP (ELEV). Displays the difference in elevation (in feet) of the TGT from the
     VIP steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the
     ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. To enter a negative value, press 0/M-SEL to enter a leading zero, which
     will be input as a negative (–) symbol, followed by the numerical elevation difference value.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
VIP-TO-PUP DED Page
The VIP-to-Pull-Up Point DED page is accessed by pressing 3 on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is
displayed, which displays the VIP-TO-TGT DED page, followed by momentarily pressing the DCS switch to the
SEQ position. This page allows the pilot to select the VIP steerpoint and modify the position of the Pull-Up Point
(PUP) relative to the location of the VIP steerpoint.
                                              1. PUP Mode Select

                      2. VIP Steerpoint
                                                                                                                6. DED Asterisks
            3. True Bearing from VIP

                    4. Range from VIP

                        5. Elevation
                    difference from VIP


                                                                                                  Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                                      Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                     Reject
                                                                                    Return DED                                Cycle DED to
                                     Accept                                                                                 VIP-TO-TGT page
                                                                                    to CNI page

                                 Enable

                           Operate                   Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                  to the next data field


1.   PUP Mode Select. Enables/disables display of the PUP symbol by placing the DED asterisks around the
     data field and pressing the 0/M-SEL button on the ICP keypad, which will highlight the text within the data
     field when PUP is enabled.
2.   VIP Steerpoint. Displays the steerpoint used as the Initial Point (IP) when VIP mode is entered. The ICP
     Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks may be
     placed over the data field and a steerpoint number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
     NOTE: VIP sighting cannot be simultaneously enabled for the same steerpoint as VRP. If a steerpoint is set
     as the VIP steerpoint and as the TGT steerpoint, pressing 0/M-SEL to enable VIP will disable VRP.
3.   True Bearing from VIP (TBRG). Displays the relative bearing (in degrees true) of the PUP from the VIP
     steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP
     keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Range from VIP (RNG). Displays the range (in nautical miles) of the PUP from the VIP steerpoint. May
     be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and
     pressing ENTR.
5.   Elevation difference from VIP (ELEV). Displays the difference in elevation (in feet) of the PUP from the
     VIP steerpoint. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the
     ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. To enter a negative value, press 0/M-SEL to enter a leading zero, which
     will be input as a negative (–) symbol, followed by the numerical elevation difference value.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Designating the IP using Direct Overflight
If the IP is selected as the sighting point and the HUD is SOI, a direct overflight and designation of the IP may
be used to simultaneously align the HUD symbology for the attack, update EHSI steering to the target (TGT),
sequence the sighting point rotary to TGT, and move the SOI to the FCR MFD format.
To perform an overfly designation of the IP,
ensure VIP has been enabled on the VIP-TO-         7. Sub-mode (OSB 2)                    6. Weapon (OSB 6)
TGT DED page, and perform the following:
1.   ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker –
     Select the VIP steerpoint number.
     or
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 4/STPT to display
     the STPT DED page.
2.   ICP Keypad – Input the VIP steerpoint
     number.
3.   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the
     steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
4.   ICP A-G Button – Press to enter A-G
     master mode.
5.   MFD format – Select SMS.
6.   SMS OSB 6 – Select weapon, as desired.
     Verify or modify SMS profile settings for
     the selected weapon, as necessary.
7.   SMS OSB 2 – Select pre-planned weapon                               5. SMS (OSB 12-14)
     delivery sub-mode, as desired (CCRP,
     LADD, EO-PRE, EO-BORE, or PRE).
                                                    8. SOI set to HUD                         10. FPM aligned for direct
8.   DMS Forward – Press to set SOI to HUD,                                                    overflight of IP location
     if necessary.
9.   Visually acquire the physical landmark
     that corresponds with the Initial Point
     (IP) location.
10. Maneuver the aircraft as necessary to
    align the Flight Path Marker (FPM) for a        9. IP location is
    direct overflight of the IP location.           visually acquired
                                                     (road junction)
11. TMS Forward-Short – Press when directly
    over the landmark at the IP location.
When TMS Forward-Short is pressed, the VIP
cursor will be immediately slewed to place the
IP steerpoint directly below the aircraft, which
will slew the Target (TGT), Pull-Up Point
(PUP), and offset aimpoints (OA1/OA2) an
equal distance and direction to align the HUD
symbology for the attack.
“BULLSEYE” REFERENCE POINT
“Bullseye” is a method of generating position data of aircraft, targets, threats or other locations by using a
common reference point known only to allied forces. This is a method often used by AWACS controllers or friendly
aircraft to ensure all aircraft operating in the area and on the same radio frequency can easily understand the
tactical situation as it develops and changes.
When a Bullseye call is transmitted over the radio, the position being referenced is always the azimuth in degrees
magnetic from the Bullseye reference, along with the distance in nautical miles. An example is shown below:
AWACS: “Viper 1-1, Darkstar 2-1. Pop-up group, at Bullseye one-three-five, twenty-two, at nineteen thousand.”
F-16C: “Friendly aircraft at Bullseye two-one-two, nineteen, at Angels three, this is Viper 1-1. Flow southwest at
low level. Viper flight engaging Bandits approaching at your 8 o’clock.”




                                       “Bullseye” position reference

The F-16C avionics provides several tools to the pilot to
integrate Bullseye communications into the cockpit                                Ghost A-A Cursor
                                                                                       Cursor
displays. Depending on the specific display in use,
positions of the ownship, MFD cursor, or designated
target can be displayed relative to Bullseye.                 Bullseye Symbol                           HSD Cursor

On the MFD to the right, the HSD format is displayed,
depicting the same scenario as shown in the figure
above. When Bullseye information is displayed, the ghost
A-A and HSD cursors are referenced from the Bullseye            Ghost A-A                              HSD Cursor
                                                              Cursor Bearing                         Bearing & Range
symbol, not the selected steerpoint. In addition, the            & Range
ownship’s position relative to the Bullseye position is
displayed in the bottom left corner of the MFD. This
provides the pilot with three Bullseye references which
can be used for coordination over the radio, or to
maintain situational awareness within the battlespace.

                                                              Ownship Bullseye LOS,
                                                                Bearing & Range
Bullseye Steerpoint
The Bullseye reference point is set by utilizing a steerpoint
within the navigation database. The steerpoint normally used
for Bullseye is steerpoint 25 and is automatically configured
as such when a mission is loaded. However, if necessary,
Bullseye can be set to a different steerpoint. Additionally,
Bullseye information must be enabled for it to be displayed
within the HUD or on the FCR, HSD, or HAD MFD formats.

Both of these tasks are performed on the BULL DED page.
                                                                                                    Ownship Bearing &
                                                                                                  Distance from Bullseye




BULL DED Page
The Bullseye DED page is accessed by pressing 8/FIX on the ICP keypad when the MISC DED page is displayed
on the DED. This page is used to enable or disable “Bullseye” position references on the HUD and MFDs, or to
set a different steerpoint as the Bullseye reference point if necessary.

              1. Bullseye Select


               2. Bullseye Point                                                              3. DED Asterisks




                                              Cycle Bullseye Point to                 Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                               next steerpoint                      the previous data field


                                     Reject
                                                                        Return DED                               No function
                                     Accept                             to CNI page

                                   Enable

                           Operate            Cycle Bullseye Point to                  Move DED asterisks
                                               previous steerpoint                    to the next data field


1.   Bullseye Select. Displays the status of the Bullseye reference indications in the cockpit. When highlighted,
     Bullseye indications are enabled. Pressing the 0/M-SEL button when the DED asterisks are set to this data
     field will enable/disable the Bullseye references within the HUD and on the FCR, HSD, and HAD MFD formats.
2.   Bullseye Point. Displays the steerpoint currently being used as the Bullseye reference point. The ICP The
     ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different steerpoint, or the DED asterisks may
     be placed over the data field and a steerpoint number may be input using the ICP keypad followed by ENTR.
3.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
HORIZONTAL SITUATION DISPLAY (HSD)
The HSD MFD format displays a top-down, plan-view depiction of the battlespace around the aircraft (ownship),
with graphical representations of flight members, hostile aircraft, air defenses, steerpoints, routes, and sensor
information. Many of these symbology elements can be selectively toggled on the HSD Control page and are
meant to enhance and maintain the pilot’s situational awareness of the tactical environment.
                               1. Centered/     2. FCR Range    3. Normal/    4. Free Text   5. Control
                             Depressed Format      Coupling    Expand View   Message Page       Page




                                                                                                          13. Ghost A-A Cursor

           6. Range Rings                                                                                 14. Cardinal Directions

                                                                                                          15. Datalink Transmit Selection

           7. Range Scale

                                                                                                          16. Freeze Mode

     8. FCR Search Volume                                                                                 17. HSD Cursor


              9. Ownship                                                                                  18. Selected Steerpoint

                                                                                                          19. Friendly Declutter
     10. Ghost A-A Cursor
       Bearing & Range
                                                                                                          20. HSD Cursor
11. Magnetic North Pointer                                                                                Bearing & Range


 12. Azimuth Steering Line                                                                                21. Steerpoint

                                                                                                          22. Active Navigation Route




                                           HSD Base Page – Primary symbology

1.   Centered/Depressed Format. Toggles between Depressed (DEP) and Centered (CEN) HSD formats.
     When set to Depressed, the ownship is biased to the bottom portion of the HSD, allowing the HSD to
     primarily depict battlespace in front of the aircraft. This format may be more useful when performing
     offensive counter-air (OCA), suppression of enemy air defenses (SEAD), offensive strikes, or general
     navigation along a flight route.
     When set to Centered, the ownship is displayed in the center of the HSD, depicting battlespace in all
     directions around the aircraft equally. This format may be more useful when loitering or performing orbits
     in an area, such as air interdiction (AI), close air support (CAS), reconnaissance, or supporting combat
     search and rescue (CSAR).
2.   FCR Range Coupling. Toggles between Decoupled (DCPL) and Coupled (CPL) HSD modes. When set to
     Decoupled (DCPL) mode, the FCR range scale will have no effect on the HSD range scale, allowing the range
     scales of each MFD format to be adjusted independently of the other.
     When set to CPL, the HSD range scale will be correlated to match the FCR range scale when in Centered
     format or to 1.5x the range of the FCR range scale when in Depressed format (one additional magenta
     range ring in front of the FCR search volume). CPL mode is overridden any time the HSD is set as SOI,
     allowing the pilot to “bump” the HSD range scale independently of the FCR range scale. Once the HSD is no
     longer selected as SOI, the HSD will revert to CPL mode.
3.   Normal/Expand View. Cycles the HSD between NORM, EXP1 and EXP2 viewing modes when the HSD is
     SOI. The Expand/FOV button on the Side Stick Controller (SSC) may also be pressed to cycle between these
     viewing modes when the HSD is selected as SOI. (See HSD Expand (EXP) Mode for more information.)
4.   Free Text Message Page (MSG). Toggles the MFD between the HSD base page and the Free Text
     Message page. (N/I)
5.   Control Page (CNTL). Toggles the MFD between the HSD base page and the HSD Control page.
6.   Range Rings. Depicts range from the ownship. When the HSD is set to Depressed (DEP) format, the outer
     ring will correspond with the HSD range scale, with two additional inner rings at ⅔ and ⅓ of the range
     scale. When the HSD is set to Centered (CEN) format, the outer ring will correspond with the HSD range
     scale, with an inner ring at ½ the range scale.
7.   Range Scale. Adjusts the scale of the HSD up or down, with the current range scale setting (in nautical
     miles) displayed between the arrow buttons. The HSD range scale corresponds with the outermost range
     ring depicted on the HSD and is scaled based on the DEP/CEN format selection. The available HSD scales
     are shown below:
     Depressed (DEP)                 15 NM          30 NM          60 NM         120 NM         240 NM
     Centered (CEN)                  10 NM          20 NM          40 NM         80 NM          160 NM
     When the HSD is set to its highest or lowest range scales, the upper or lower range scale arrows are
     removed, respectively.
8.   FCR Search Volume. Depicts the lateral boundaries of the fire control radar scan pattern in azimuth and
     range, based on the current azimuth setting, range setting, and antenna steering.
9.   Ownship. Depicts the location of the ownship.
10. Ghost A-A Cursor Bearing & Range. When the Ghost A-A cursor is displayed, this data field will display
    the bearing (in degrees magnetic) and range (in nautical miles) from the currently selected steerpoint to
    the Ghost A-A cursor. If Bullseye is enabled on the BULL DED page, this data field will display the bearing
    and range from the Bullseye point to the Ghost A-A cursor.
11. Magnetic North Pointer. Depicts magnetic north (360°) from the innermost magenta range ring.
12. Azimuth Steering Line. Displays the relative alignment of the aircraft heading with the bearing to the
    current steerpoint, SPI, or weapon release solution. If the line is to the left or right of the watermark, the
    pilot must turn left or right respectively toward the vertical line to align the aircraft with the desired course
    or target. If the line is aligned through the center of the watermark, the aircraft is on course toward the
    selected steerpoint, SPI, or weapon release solution.
13. Ghost A-A Cursor. When the opposite MFD displays the FCR format and the FCR is operating in Combined
    Radar Mode (CRM), the location of the FCR cursor relative to the ownship will be depicted on the HSD. This
    assists the pilot in correlating information from the FCR, which is displayed in a B-scope format, within the
    overall tactical situation depicted on the HSD, which represents a Plan Position Indicator (PPI) format.
14. Cardinal Directions. Depicts the cardinal directions of east, south, and west (referenced from magnetic
    north) from the innermost range ring.
15. Datalink Transmit Selection (XMT). Toggles the selected datalink that will be used to transmit the
    selected steerpoint, SPI, or SEAD target type when the VHF UHF Transmit switch on the throttle grip is
    pressed inboard, Right-Long (>0.5 seconds). Each press of the XMT button will toggle between the settings.
     •    TNDL. The steerpoint, SPI, or SEAD target is transmitted over the Tactical Net Datalink.
     •    SMDL. The steerpoint, SPI, or SEAD target is transmitted over the Secure Modem Datalink. (N/I)
16. Freeze Mode (FZ). Freezes the HSD independently of the Ownship symbol. If the HSD is selected as SOI,
    the HSD will enter Centered (CEN) format and will be centered on the location of the HSD cursor when the
    FZ button was pressed. If the HSD is not selected as SOI, the HSD will enter Centered (CEN) format and
    will be centered on the location of the Ownship symbol when the FZ button was pressed.
     When the FZ button is pressed a second time, the HSD will become exit Freeze mode and return to its
     previous position. If the HSD was set to Depressed (DEP) format prior to entering Freeze mode, the HSD
     will return to DEP format.
     When the HSD is set to Freeze mode, the Normal (NORM)/Expand (EXP) function will be unavailable.
17. HSD Cursor. When the HSD is selected as SOI, the HSD cursor will appear at the Ownship symbol if the
    Ghost A-A cursor is not displayed. If the Ghost A-A cursor is displayed when the HSD is selected as SOI, the
    HSD cursor will appear within the Ghost A-A cursor. If HSD is not selected as SOI, the HSD cursor is removed.
     The HSD cursor is slewed using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch when the HSD is selected as SOI and may
     be used to set a steerpoint or markpoint on the HSD as the selected steerpoint for navigation, or used in
     conjunction with the HSD Expand mode.
     The HSD cursor may also be used to “bump” the range scale of the HSD itself. If the HSD cursor is slewed
     to the top of the HSD, the HSD range scale will be “bumped” to the next higher setting. Likewise, if the HSD
     cursor is slewed to the bottom of the HSD, the HSD range scale will be “bumped” to the next lower setting.
18. Selected Steerpoint. The steerpoint selected for navigation is displayed as a solid white circle.
19. Friendly Declutter. Controls the display of friendly aircraft PPLI symbols received over TNDL datalink.
    Each press will cycle through the three declutter levels.
     •    FR ON. All friendly aircraft PPLI symbols are displayed.
     •    FL ON. Only Flight member (1-4), Team member (5-8), and Donor PPLI symbols are displayed. All
          other friendly aircraft PPLI symbols are hidden.
     •    FR OFF. All friendly aircraft PPLI symbols are hidden.
20. HSD Cursor Bearing & Range. When the HSD cursor is displayed, this data field will display the bearing
    (in degrees magnetic) and range (in nautical miles) from the currently selected steerpoint to the HSD cursor.
    If Bullseye is enabled on the BULL DED page, this data field will display the bearing and range from the
    Bullseye point to the HSD cursor.
21. Steerpoint. Steerpoints that are not selected for navigation are displayed as hollow white circles.
22. Active Navigation Route. The active navigation route is displayed as a solid white line linking sequential
    steerpoints 1-25.
23. Pre-planned Threat & Range Ring (see image on next page). Pre-planned air defense unit locations
    with a corresponding range ring that corresponds to the approximate Weapon Engagement Zone (WEZ) of
    that threat type. If the ownship enters the range ring of a pre-planned threat, the threat symbol and ring
    will be displayed in red.
     NOTE: These are static locations of air defenses and do not reflect whether or not the air defense threat is
     destroyed, or if any new threats have been detected after the aircraft has been started.
24. Bullseye Symbol (see image on next page). Depicts the location of the Bullseye point. The Bullseye
    point is normally set to Steerpoint 25 but can be set to a different steerpoint on the BULL DED page.
     23. Pre-planned
   Threat & Range Ring

                                                                                         28. Hostile Air
    24. Bullseye Symbol                                                                 Surveillance Track


 25. Friendly Donor PPLI                                                                29. Ghost A-G Cursor


        26. Friendly Air                                                                30. Ownship Markpoint
       Surveillance Track
                                                                                       31. Flight/Team Member PPLI


       27. Bullseye LOS,                                                                32. Cursor Zero
       Bearing & Range




                                 HSD Base Page – Tactical symbology

25. Friendly Donor PPLI. A friendly, TNDL participant aircraft that is set as a Donor to the ownship.
26. Friendly Air Surveillance Track. Friendly aircraft that have been detected by an AWACS aircraft and
    distributed across the TNDL network as air surveillance tracks.
27. Bullseye LOS, Bearing & Range. Displays a pointer symbol that indicates the relative direction (line-of-
    sight or LOS) to the Bullseye point from the nose of the ownship. Displays the ownship’s range (in nautical
    miles) and bearing (in degrees magnetic) from the Bullseye point, with the range displayed inside the pointer
    symbol and the bearing from Bullseye displayed below it.
28. Hostile Air Surveillance Track. Hostile aircraft that have been detected by an AWACS aircraft and
    distributed across the TNDL network as air surveillance tracks.
29. Ghost A-G Cursor. Depicts the location of the System-Point-of-Interest (SPI) when in Air-to-Ground (A-G)
    master mode and the FCR is not in Standby (STBY) or Override (OVRD).
30. Ownship Markpoint. Depicts the location of an ownship markpoint location (steerpoints 26-30).
31. Flight/Team Member PPLI. Friendly, TNDL participant aircraft that are set as a Flight member (1-4) or
    a Team member (5-8) of the ownship.
32. Cursor Zero (CZ). Removes any accumulated cursor slews from the active cursor. (See Cursor Zero for
    more information.)
HSD Control (CNTL) Page
The HSD Control page is used to configure individual HSD graphic elements and symbology to suit the tactical
situation or individual preferences of the pilot. The first page displays options regarding base level HSD graphics,
navigation routes, and geographic lines loaded from the DTC. The second page displays options regarding the
datalink symbology received through the SMDL and TNDL datalink systems.
                              1. FCR Search Volume   2. Pre-planned Threats   3. Advanced IFF
                                                            function




     5. Navigation Route 1                                                                      9. Geographic Line 1



      6. Navigation Route 2                                                                     10. Geographic Line 2



      7. Navigation Route 3                                                                     11. Geographic Line 3



            8. Range Rings                                                                      12. Geographic Line 4



                                                                                                13. Page Sequence




                                                HSD Control Page – Page 1

1.   FCR Search Volume (FCR). Toggles the display of the FCR search volume.
2.   Pre-planned Threats (PRE). Not implemented.
3.   Advanced Identification-Friend-or-Foe (AIFF). Toggles the display of AIFF interrogation replies. (N/I)
4.   Navigation Route 1 (NAV1). Toggles the display of navigation route 1 loaded from the DTC.
5.   Navigation Route 2 (NAV2). Toggles the display of navigation route 2 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
6.   Navigation Route 3 (NAV3). Toggles the display of navigation route 3 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
7.   Range Rings (RINGS). Toggles display of the HSD range rings.
8.   Geographic Line 1 (LINE1). Toggles the display of geographic line/shape 1 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
9.   Geographic Line 2 (LINE2). Toggles the display of geographic line/shape 2 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
10. Geographic Line 3 (LINE3). Toggles the display of geographic line/shape 3 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
11. Geographic Line 4 (LINE4). Toggles the display of geographic line/shape 4 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
12. Page Sequence. Cycles the MFD to Page 2 of the HSD Control page.
                              13. Engagement Status     14. Reference Point   15. Primary Datalink Track Range




      16. Air Target Tracks                                                                                      21. Air Surveillance Tracks


   17. Ground Targets &                                                                                          22. Friendly Ground PPLI
 Ground Surveillance Tracks                                                                                      or Friendly Ground Tracks


             18. SAM Sites                                                                                       23. No function



                 19. Ships                                                                                       24. No function



            20. Air Targets                                                                                      25. Page Sequence




                                                      HSD Control Page – Page 2

13. Engagement Status (TNDL ENG). Not implemented.
14. Reference Point (REF PT). Not implemented.
15. Primary Datalink Track Range (PDLT RNG). Not implemented. (N/I)
16. Air Target Tracks (A TGTS). Toggles display of airborne target tracks transmitted by Flight/Team
    members and Donors via TNDL. (N/I)
17. Ground Targets & Ground Surveillance Tracks (G TGTS). Toggles display of non-SAM ground targets
    received via SMDL or ground surveillance tracks via TNDL. (N/I)
18. SAM Sites (SAM). Toggles display of pre-planned SAM threats, or SAM threats received as a SEAD target
    via SMDL or via TNDL.
19. Ships (SHIP). Toggles display of friendly or hostile ship positions received via TNDL. (N/I)
20. Air Targets (A SMDL). Toggles display of airborne targets transmitted by other fighters via SMDL. (N/I)
21. Air Surveillance Tracks (A SURV). Toggles the display of air surveillance tracks received over TNDL from
    AWACS aircraft. These may include hostile aircraft, or friendly aircraft that are not TNDL capable but are
    visible to the AWACS radar and have been determined to be friendly.
22. Friendly Ground PPLI/Ground Tracks (G FRND). Toggles display of friendly ground unit PPLI or ground
    tracks received via TNDL. (N/I)
23. Launch Acceptability Region (LAR). No function.
24. Mission Planned Target (MP). No function.
25. Page Sequence. Cycles the MFD to Page 1 of the HSD Control page.
HSD Expand (EXP) Mode
If the HSD is SOI, HSD Expand mode be entered by pressing
the Expand/FOV button on the Side Stick Controller (SSC) or
by pressing OSB 3 on the HSD MFD format. Each press will
cycle between NORM, EXP1, and EXP2 viewing modes. When
EXP1 is entered, the HSD will switch to a 2:1 zoom ratio. When   HSD Cursor
EXP2 is entered, the HSD will switch to a 4:1 zoom ratio.
When Expand mode is entered, the HSD will be centered
around the location at which the HSD cursor was placed when
Expand mode was selected. Additionally, the following options
are removed from the HSD:
     •    Centered/Depressed option at OSB 1.
     •    FCR Range Coupling option at OSB 2.
     •    Range Scale and Range Scale Increase/Decrease
          options at OSB 19 and OSB 20.
     •    Range Rings.
     •    Cardinal Directions.
Expand mode may be exited by performing any of the following
actions:
     •    The Expand/FOV button on the SSC is pressed to
          cycle back to NORM.
     •    OSB 3 on the HSD MFD format is pressed to cycle
          back to NORM.
     •    The SOI is assigned to another MFD format or the
          HUD.
HSD Zoom Mode
The HSD may be momentarily commanded to a range scale required to display all wingmen datalink symbols by
pressing and holding the Expand/FOV button on the Side Stick Controller (SSC) for >0.5 seconds, regardless of
the current SOI. The HSD will automatically enter a Centered (CEN) format around the ownship and will be set
to the minimum HSD scale that will encompass the datalink symbols of each Flight member (wingmen 1-4) and
each Team member (wingmen 5-8).
HSD Zoom mode provides a means of viewing the immediate surroundings around the ownship, particularly when
in formation with other aircraft in which multiple symbols may be clustered around and/or superimposed on the
ownship symbol at higher HSD range scales. The range scale limits of the HSD when in Zoom mode are between
5 and 160 NM.




                                               HSD Zoom Mode

The NORM/EXP1/EXP2 mode option at OSB 3 will be replaced with ZOOM to indicate the HSD is in Zoom mode.
Additionally, the following options are removed from the HSD:
    •    Centered/Depressed format option at OSB 1.
    •    FCR Range Coupling option at OSB 2.
    •    Free Text Message Page option at OSB 4.
    •    Control Page option at OSB 5.
    •    Datalink Transmit Selection option at OSB 6.
    •    Freeze Mode option at OSB 7.
    •    Friendly Declutter Option at OSB 9.
    •    Range Scale Increase/Decrease options at OSB 19 and OSB 20.
    •    Range Scale
Releasing the Expand/FOV button on the SSC will exit HSD Zoom mode.
STORES MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (SMS)
The SMS MFD format is used for reviewing and configuring loaded munitions and external stores. SMS weapon
profiles and settings are retained for each master mode. When the pilot switches to a different master mode, the
SMS base page will be set to the SMS mode corresponding with the retained settings and/or weapon delivery
sub-mode for the selected master mode.
See the Air-to-Air Employment and Air-to-Ground Employment chapters for more information regarding specific
SMS functions during the employment of weapons.


SMS Inventory (INV) Page
An Inventory page is available that shows external stores loaded on each station. When the aircraft master mode
is set to Navigation, Selective Jettison, or Emergency Jettison modes, the SMS Inventory page is displayed as the
base page. When the aircraft master mode is set to Air-to-Air Missile, Air-to-Ground, Missile Override, or Dogfight
modes, the INV page may be accessed from each respective base page by pressing the INV button (OSB 4).




      1. SMS Operating Mode


2. Gun Ammunition Quantity


     3. Gun Ammunition Type                                                                4. External Stores Wingform




                                                                                           5. Selective Jettison Page


                                  SMS Inventory Page – Navigation mode


1.     SMS Operating Mode. Displays the operating mode of the of the Stores Management System.
2.     Gun Ammunition Quantity. Displays the remaining ammunition quantity onboard for the M61 20mm
       rotary cannon, in 10 round increments (e.g. “51” indicates 510 rounds remaining).
3.     Gun Ammunition Type. Displays the type of ammunition loaded into the internal ammunition drum. “M56”
       will be displayed for any M50-series ammunition. “PGU-28” will be displayed for any PGU-series ammunition.
4.     External Stores Wingform. Displays external stores installed on underwing and center fuselage pylons,
       including with any associated missile launchers or bomb racks.
5.     Selective Jettison Page. Selects Selective Jettison mode, overriding the current aircraft master mode.
In addition to the gun ammunition type displayed in the top left corner of the inventory page, the SMS will use a
series of weapon and equipment codes to indicate specifically what external stores are loaded onto the underwing
and centerline fuselage stations on the aircraft. A list of these codes is provided on the following page.
Stations 1, 2, 8, and 9 may only be equipped with LAU-129 air-to-air missile rails. These stations are displayed in
a two-line format, with the LAU-129 Missile Rail Launcher on the first line and the corresponding air-to-air weapon
on the second line.




                                        SMS Inventory Page Layout

Stations 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 may be equipped with a variety of external stores, including air-to-air or air-to-ground
munitions, fuel tanks, and ECM or travel pods. These stations are displayed in a three-line format. Depending on
the combination of external munitions or equipment that is installed on these stations, the station data may be
composed of one, two or three lines of data.
In the example above, stations 3, 5, and 7 are installed with a MAU-12 Ejector Rack. However, the MAU-12
installed on station 3 is carrying a TER-9/A Triple Ejector Rack loaded with a pair of GBU-12 laser-guided bombs
and station 7 is carrying a BRU-57/A Smart Multiple Carriage Rack loaded with a pair of GBU-38 inertially-aided
bombs, whilst the MAU-12 on station 5 is simply carrying an ECM pod.
SMS Weapon/External Stores Codes
 CODE    MUNITION/EQUIPMENT                       CODE    MUNITION/EQUIPMENT
 M56     M50-series 20mm ammunition               MAU     MAU-12 Ejector Rack
 PGU28   PGU-series 20mm ammunition               TER     TER-9/A Triple Ejector Rack
                                                  MRL     LAU-129A/A Missile Rail Launcher
 TA9LM   CAP-9M Captive Air Training Missile      L03     LAU-3/A 19-tube Rocket Launcher
 A-9J    AIM-9P IR-guided missile                 L68     LAU-68D/A 7-tube Rocket Launcher
 A-9NP   AIM-9P3 IR-guided missile                L131    LAU-131/A 7-tube Rocket Launcher
 A-9LM   AIM-9P5, -9L, or -9M IR-guided missile   L88A    LAU-88/A Triple Rail Missile Launcher
 A-9X    AIM-9X IR-guided missile                 L117    LAU-117A(V)3/A Maverick Missile Launcher
 A120B   AIM-120B active radar-guided missile     L118    LAU-118(V)2/A Guided Missile Launcher
 A120C   AIM-120C active radar-guided missile     BRU     BRU-57/A Smart Multiple Carriage Rack


 ACMI    AN/ASQ-T50 TCTS pod                      TK300   300-gallon external centerline tank
 AL131   AN/ALQ-131 ECM pod                       TK370   370-gallon external wing tank
 AL119   AN/ALQ-184 ECM pod
                                                  GB12    GBU-12 or BDU-50LGB laser-guided bomb
 BD33T   BDU-33 practice bomb                     GB10C   GBU-10C/B laser-guided bomb
 B49     Mk-82 AIR or BDU-50HD with BSU-49        GB24A   GBU-24A/B laser-guided bomb
 M82     Mk-82 or BDU-50LD bomb                   GB31A   GBU-31(V)1/B INS/GPS-guided bomb
 M82S    Mk-82 bomb with Mk15 Snakeye pedals      GB31B   GBU-31(V)3/B INS/GPS-guided bomb
 M84     Mk-84 bomb                               GB38    GBU-38 INS/GPS-guided bomb
 B50     Mk-84 AIR bomb with BSU-50
 BD50    Mk-84 AIR practice bomb with BSU-50      CB103   CBU-103 INS/GPS-guided cluster bomb
                                                  CB105   CBU-105 INS/GPS-guided cluster bomb
 CB87B   CBU-87 with 202 BLU-97B submunitions
 CB97B   CBU-97 with 40 BLU-108 submunitions      AG65D   AGM-65D IR-guided missile 125lb warhead
                                                  AG65G   AGM-65G IR-guided missile 300lb warhead
 M151    M151 high explosive rockets              AG65H   AGM-65H TV-guided missile 125lb warhead
 M156    M156 white phosphorus rockets            AG65K   AGM-65K TV-guided missile 300lb warhead
 M5      Mk5 high explosive anti-tank rockets     AG88    AGM-88C anti-radar guided missile
 M61     Mk61 or WTU-1/B training rockets         A154A   AGM-154A INS/GPS-guided glide bomb
SMS Selective Jettison (S-J) Page
The Selective Jettison page facilitates jettison of individual weapons and/or weapon racks from the external
stations. This allows the pilot to have greater control over what is physically jettisoned from the aircraft. Only
external stores that are capable of being jettisoned will be displayed on the SMS Selective Jettison page. These
include external fuel tanks, air-to-ground weapons, and air-to-ground weapon racks. Air-to-air missiles, air-to-air
missile rails, and ECM/Travel pods cannot be jettisoned and will not be displayed.
When OSB 11 is pressed on the SMS page, Selective Jettison master mode is entered, the SMS Selective Jettison
page is displayed on the SMS MFD format, and “JETT” will be displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status. Pressing
OSB 11 again while the SMS Selective Jettison page is already displayed will exit the Selective Jettison master
mode and return to the previous master mode. Alternatively, if any other master mode is selected, Selective
Jettison mode will be exited.
External stores are selected by pressing the corresponding OSB for that external wing or fuselage station. Any
items that are highlighted in white are selected for jettison. If more than one item exists on a given station, the
first press of the corresponding OSB will enable the lowest external store (shown below on Station 3), and the
second press of the OSB will highlight the next highest external store (shown below on Station 7). An additional
press will disable jettison for all items on that station and the stores will be de-highlighted.
If the Weapon Release button on the Side Stick Controller is pressed while the SMS Selective Jettison page is
displayed, any highlighted external stores will be jettisoned in an unarmed state, regardless of whether the
MASTER ARM switch is set to MASTER ARM, OFF, or SIMULATE.
                                1. SMS Operating Mode   2. Station 5 Select




          3. Station 4 Select                                                                 5. Station 6 Select



          4. Station 3 Select                                                                 6. Station 7 Select




                                                                                              7. Selective Jettison Page




                                                SMS Selective Jettison page

1.   SMS Operating Mode. The SMS is in Selective Jettison mode and will display any external stores that may
     be selected for jettison.
2.   Station 5 Select. Selects the centerline fuselage pylon for jettison. This option will only be displayed when
     a 300-gallon external centerline tank is loaded.
3.   Station 4 Select. Selects the left inboard underwing pylon for jettison. This option will only be displayed if
     a 370-gallon external wing tank is loaded or if an air-to-ground weapon and/or weapon rack is loaded.
4.   Station 3 Select. Selects the left middle underwing pylon for jettison. This option will only be displayed
     when an air-to-ground weapon and/or weapon rack is loaded.
5.   Station 6 Select. Selects the right inboard underwing pylon for jettison. This option will only be displayed
     if a 370-gallon external wing tank is loaded or if an air-to-ground weapon and/or weapon rack is loaded.
6.   Station 7 Select. Selects the right middle underwing pylon for jettison. This option will only be displayed
     when an air-to-ground weapon and/or weapon rack is loaded.
7.   Selective Jettison Page. Exits Selective Jettison mode, returning the aircraft to the previous master mode.
Selecting individual Stores or Stations for Jettison
To selectively jettison individual munitions,
missile launchers, rocket launchers, bomb
racks, or external fuel tanks, perform the
following:
1.   MFD format – Select SMS, as necessary.
2.   SMS OSB 11 – Select S-J page.
3.   SMS OSB 3 – Select to enable jettison of
     the centerline fuel tank from station 5, as
     desired.
4.   SMS OSB 19/7 – Select once to enable
     jettison of the external wing tanks or the
     munitions loaded under stations 4 and 6,
     as desired.
     or
4.   SMS OSB 19/7 – Select twice to enable
     jettison of the munitions and munition
     carriage racks loaded under stations 4
     and 6, as desired.
5.   SMS OSB 18/8 – Select once to enable
     jettison of the munitions loaded under                         1. SMS (OSB 12-14)      2. S-J (OSB 11)
     stations 5 and 7, as desired.
     or
5.   SMS OSB 18/8 – Select twice to enable
     jettison of the munitions and munition
                                                                    3. Station 5 (OSB 3)
     carriage racks or launchers loaded under
     stations 5 and 7, as desired.
                                                   4. Station 4 (OSB 19)              4. Station 6 (OSB 7)
6.   MASTER ARM switch – MASTER ARM.
7.   Weapon Release Button – Press.
     or
7.   ALT REL Button – Press.
8.   MASTER ARM Switch – OFF, or as                5. Station 3 (OSB 18)              5. Station 7 (OSB 8)
     desired.
9.   SMS OSB 11 – De-select S-J page.




                                                                                            9. S-J (OSB 11)
SMS Emergency Jettison (E-J) Page
When the Emergency Jettison button is pressed on the Left Auxiliary Console, the Emergency master mode is
entered, overriding the existing master mode, and the SMS Emergency Jettison page is displayed on the SMS
MFD format. “JETT” will be displayed in the HUD Master Mode Status. Releasing the Emergency Jettison button
will exit Emergency Jettison mode and return to the previous master mode.




                                       SMS Emergency Jettison page

Like the SMS Selective Jettison page, the Emergency Jettison page only displays external stores that can and
have been jettisoned. These include external fuel tanks, air-to-ground weapons, and air-to-ground weapon racks.
Air-to-air missiles, air-to-air missile rails, and ECM/Travel pods cannot be jettisoned and will not be displayed.
HANDS-ON CONTROLS
The Display Management Switch (DMS), Target                                       Missile Step Button
Management Switch (TMS) and Expand/FOV button
on the Side Stick Controller (SSC), along with the                                Target Management
RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip,                                      Switch (4-way)
are the pilot’s controls for selecting a Sensor-Of-                               Display Management
Interest (SOI), changing MFD formats, designating                                    Switch (4-way)
locations seen visually by the pilot, or manually
slewing existing designations or sighting points.                                  Expand/FOV Button

The Missile Step button on the SSC is the pilot’s
control for cycling between Air-to-Air or Air-to-
Ground sub-modes. The DOG FIGHT switch on the
throttle grip allows the pilot to rapidly transition to
an air-to-air combat mode from an existing master
mode when an imminent threat to the aircraft exists
from hostile fighters.
                                                                   DOG FIGHT Switch                 RDR CURSOR/ENABLE Switch
                                                                     (3-position)                    (Multi-directional, Depress)



Throttle Grip Commands.                    Side Stick Controller (SSC) Commands. The Target Management
The RDR CURSOR/ENABLE                      Switch (TMS), Missile Step button, and Expand/FOV button commands
switch is multi-directional,               are contextual, based on the SOI, master mode, whether a HUD or
allowing the HUD TD Box or                 HMCS designation exists, and in some cases the current SMS weapon
HSD cursor to be moved in any              profile.
direction.

        Select Dogfight Mode                    HUD DTOS/VIS Target Designate
                                                HSD Designate Symbol
     Return to previous Mode                    Set SOI to HMCS from HUD                                   Missile Step
                                                                                                           Cycle CCIP-DTOS-CCRP1
Select Missile Override Mode
                                                                                                           Cycle A-A Missile Type2
                                                                           HUD Cycle Sighting Point3
                                                                           FCR Cycle Sighting Point3



                                                HUD DTOS/VIS Target Reject                       Set SOI to HUD
                                                HSD Drop Designation
                                                Set SOI to HUD from HMCS4

      HUD Slew DTOS/VIS TD Box                                                                                          Cycle Right
                                                                                Cycle Left
      HSD Slew HSD Cursor                                                                                               MFD Format
                                                                                MFD Format



      Short press (<0.5 sec)
                                                                                             Set SOI to MFD from HUD
      Long press (>0.5 sec)                         HSD Cycle HSD EXP Modes                  Swap SOI between MFDs

      Continuous press                              Display HSD ZOOM Mode                    Toggle HDU On/Off



1.    Master mode must be set to Air-to-Ground mode and selected SMS weapon not AGM-65 or AGM-88 missiles.
2.    Master mode must be set to Air-to-Air Missile mode, Missile Override mode, or Dogfight mode.
3.    Master mode must be set to Navigation mode or Air-to-Ground mode and set to a pre-planned sub-mode.
4.    An existing HMCS designation must be rejected before SOI can be returned to HUD from HMCS.
 APG-68 FIRE CONTROL
APG-68
 RADARFIRE CONTROL RADAR
FIRE CONTROL RADAR
The Westinghouse AN/APG-68(V)5 is a pulse-Doppler radar that functions as the F-16C’s Fire Control Radar (FCR),
and includes operating modes for targeting, weapons employment, and navigation.




                         AN/APG-68 Detection, Targeting, and Ground Mapping

The APG-68 occupies the forward nose section of the F-16’s fuselage and consists of a mechanically-steered
planar array transmitter/receiver antenna, radio frequency signal generators, and associated processors and
electronics. The FCR includes several modes for both air-to-air and air-to-ground operations and can be used to
perform updates to the inertial navigation system while enroute if necessary.




Fire Control Radar Activation
The FCR is powered by positioning the FCR switch to the forward
position on the SNSR PWR control panel on the right console.
The Fire Control Radar cannot function without the MMC or MFD
avionics systems, or without a properly aligned INS.


Mode Selection
You may change modes by pressing the OSB 1 adjacent to STBY. The following options will be displayed
depending on Master Mode.
AIR-TO-AIR MODES
The FCR provides two basic A-A modes for target detection, acquisition, and tracking:
Combined Radar Mode (CRM). This mode combines air-to-air sub-modes used for search under one interface.
Sub-modes are:
     •    Range While Search (RWS)
     •    Track While Scan (TWS)
Air Combat Mode (ACM). This mode combines all sub-modes for automatic target acquisition under one
interface. Sub-modes are:
     •    30° × 20°
     •    Boresight
     •    10° × 60°
     •    Slewable
Single Target Track (STT) is an additional mode entered by locking a target in CRM or ACM sub-modes.
Air-to-Air weapon employment using the radar is discussed in the following sections.
          Air to Air Gunnery
          AIM-9M/X Employment
          AIM-120 Employment
We will first discuss aspects of the radar that spans multiple modes, and then later we will discuss radar functions
specific to unique applications/weapons.
The air-to-air radar display uses a standard B-scope format in which the ownship (your aircraft) is in the bottom
center of the display. As such, all indications on the b-scope are ahead of the ownship. Targets on the scope are
displayed in range from the closest being at the bottom and the more distant being toward the top. Contacts left
and right of the ownship are represented as being indicted left and right of the center of the display to indicate
azimuth.




                                                                                       Control Menu



                                                                                       Steerpoint
         Radar Display Range
                                                                                       Range Scale

               Target Symbols


               Azimuth Setting                                                         Acquisition Cursor and Min
                                                                                       Max Search Altitude
               Elevation Caret
                                                                                       Azimuth Caret
              Elevation Setting



           Ownship      Bearing
           and Range
Important, basic components of the display include:
Radar Display Range. The currently selected range displayed on the MFD is shown on the left of the display.
This can be increased or decreased by pressing the adjacent OSBs or by slewing the acquisition cursor to the top
or bottom of the display.
Target Symbols. Target symbols are displayed as solid squares (bricks). The horizonal position of the target
symbol indicates angular position in respect to ownship heading. The vertical position indicates range.
Acquisition Cursor. Consisting of two parallel, vertical lines, this cursor is moved in response to Cursor/Enable
Switch commands. When in a RADAR search mode, the altitude band being covered by the RADAR beam is
indicated above and below the cursor.
Targets are locked by slewing the cursor over the target symbol and commanding TMS Forward on the Side Stick
Controller (SSC).
Range Scale. The right side of the b-scope represents RADAR range. The scale includes marks for ¼, ½, and
¾ of the selected radar range.
Azimuth Setting. Indicates the azimuth setting, in tens of degrees. A setting of “A6” means the radar is scanning
60° to either side of boresight, which is the maximum scan azimuth. Options are A6, A3, and A1. Azimuth setting
will be A1 during the RWS acquisition process. Higher azimuth settings will result in a longer detection period and
a slower refresh rate.
Elevation Setting. Indicates the elevation area scanned, in number of bars. A setting of “4B” means the radar
is sweeping four different elevations (corresponding to a 40° elevation range). Options are 4B, 2B, and 1B. Higher
elevation settings will result in a longer detection period and a slower refresh rate.
Antenna Azimuth and Elevation Caret. The current radar azimuth is shown by a T symbol on the bottom of
the display. The current radar elevation is shown by a T symbol on the left of the display. The carets move along
scales that show the full ±60⁰ sweep range of the antenna.
Ownship Bearing and Range. This shows the bearing and range from your own aircraft to the Bullseye.
Control Menu. Pressing this OSB takes you to the control menu. (See FCR CNTL page for more information.)
Radar modes are selected by pressing the OSB adjacent to the current mode (OSB 1). After pressing this OSB, a
menu of all available air-to-air modes is displayed on the left side of the display. Press the OSB adjacent to the
desired mode to select it.


                Radar Mode




             Mode Selections
Combined Radar Mode (CRM)
This mode is selected by default at power-up. It is designed to reduce pilot workload by combining air-to-air sub-
modes used for search under one interface. Sub-modes are:
     •    Range While Search (RWS)
               o    Situational Awareness Mode (SAM)
               o    Dual Target Track (DTT)
     •    Track While Scan (TWS)
     •    Single Target Track (STT)
The RWS and TWS sub-modes may be cycled by pressing OSB 2 adjacent to the sub-mode.




                Radar Mode


              Radar Sub-mode




You can also cycle between RWS and TWS by holding TMS Right for more
than one second.



                                                                             Target Management
                                                                               Switch (4-way)
Range While Search (RWS) Sub-mode
The Range While Search (RWS) sub-mode is used for fast, long-range acquisition and engagement. The pilot can
set the acquisition range (10, 20, 40, 80, or 160 nautical miles) and change the azimuth width and elevation.
Targets may be acquired and tracked in three ways: Situational Awareness Mode (SAM), Dual Target Track (DTT),
or Single Target Track (STT).
•   Situational Awareness Mode (SAM). Placing the acquisition cursor over a target and pressing TMS
    Forward commands SAM. The antenna will be directed to the cursor position and a 4-bar, ±10° spotlight
    scan will be performed while TMS Forward is held.




                                                                                    Acquisition Cursor
                     Target



            Spotlight Scan




    If a target is not under the acquisition cursor when TMS Forward is released or no target is detected, the
    scan coverage reverts to the previous scan pattern. The SAM acquisition sequence will only commence if a
    target was under the TDC when TMS forward was pressed.
    After a successful acquisition, the radar enters SAM mode, with the target bugged. The radar will continue
    a scan pattern, pausing to dwell on the bugged target periodically. An AIM-120 AMRAAM will guide on the
    bugged target even without an STT lock.
            Additional Target

                                                                                       DLZ
              Bugged Target


              Scan Limit Lines




    If a missile is selected (AIM-9 or AIM-120), the DLZ will be displayed along the right edge.
    SAM mode may be exited with TMS Aft. Positioning the acquisition cursor over the bugged target and
    pressing TMS Forward commands Single Target Track. Positioning the acquisition cursor over another target
    and pressing TMS Forward commands Dual Target Track.
•   Dual Target Track (DTT). Dual Target Track is entered from SAM by bugging a second target. In DTT
    mode, the radar will dwell on two targets while continuing a scan pattern centered around the secondary
    target. If the primary target closes within 10 NM of the aircraft, the scan pattern is inhibited, and the radar
    will “ping-pong” between the two bugged targets.




                                                                                          Primary Target
      Additional Target


        Secondary
        Target
    In DTT, pressing TMS Right will swap the primary and secondary targets. The radar will shift its scan pattern
    to be centered around the new secondary target. AIM-120 launches in DTT will track the primary target.
•   Single Target Track (STT). Placing the acquisition cursor over a primary bugged target and pressing TMS
    Forward commands Single Target Track mode. Placing the acquisition target over a non-bugged target and
    pressing TMS Forward twice in quick succession accomplishes the same function.
    In STT, the radar focuses all its energy on a single target and provides high-resolution and high-frequency
    updates. However, the radar does not scan, and will no longer detect other contacts. If the enemy has a
    RWR onboard, it will be alerted to the STT lock.




                                                                                     Closure Rate
             Aspect Angle
                                                                                     Airspeed
             Ground Track




             Locked Target




    STT mode may be exited with TMS Aft. TMS Aft once returns to SAM mode with the target bugged. TMS Aft
    twice returns to the previous CRM mode.
    This mode is discussed in the Single Target Track (STT) section below.
Track While Scan (TWS) Sub-mode
TWS mode is a multi-target tracking mode. In TWS, the radar will initially detect only hits, like RWS. However,
as successive hits in proximity are detected in subsequent scans, the radar will attempt to combine these hits
into targets. Each detected target is represented by a trackfile, which stores a history of detected hits. This history
is used to build a picture of the target’s heading, speed, and other properties.
TWS has several restrictions. The radar will attempt to build trackfiles for each contact, but given a large scan
volume, there will be a sizable refresh time between scans. During each scan the radar will try to predict the
position of the contact for the next scan. If, however, the target takes evasive, high-G maneuvers and quickly
changing its trajectory and speed, the radar can lose the track by making an incorrect trackfile prediction, and
the contact will disappear from the radar, replaced only with a hit on the next scan.
TWS, when combined with the AIM-120, provides a powerful ability to engage multiple targets quickly.
Nevertheless, target tracking is not as reliable as SAM, and especially less reliable than STT. Unlike STT though,
a TWS lock does not trigger an elevated RWR indication. As such, the first warning the enemy pilot will likely get
is when the radar seeker of the AIM-120 goes active.
Trackfiles are automatically established on up to 10 targets based on information received from each radar sweep.
The radar scan volume options are identical to those used for RWS but are reduced to 3-bar, ±25° when a target
is designated.
Four types of target symbols are available to help sort contacts. They are, in increasing order of importance:
Search Target, Track Target, System Target, and Bugged Target. In addition, two other target symbols can
appear: Cursor Target and Locked Target.
Search Target. These are radar hits that have not been resolved well enough to build a track. They are displayed
as a small brick in much the same way as in RWS.
These targets disappear after a few sweeps if a track cannot be obtained. If a valid track is obtained, usually
after being detected on two consecutive sweeps, the contact automatically becomes a Track Target.
Track Target. Once enough information about a Search Target has been received to build a trackfile, it is
upgraded to a Track Target. These targets are displayed as a larger brick with a velocity vector line showing their
direction of travel. Their altitude is displayed just below each contact. Up to 10 of these tracks may be present
at one time.




                                                                                          Track Target
               Search Targets
Track targets can be considered the most basic radar contact. Other options become available after a trackfile
has been established. The pilot can upgrade any Track Targets of interest to System Targets.
System Target. System Targets are Track Targets designated by the pilot. System Targets are not given any
additional radar energy; the System Target feature is only used by the pilot to designate those targets that the
pilot may wish to monitor or employ weapons against later.
To upgrade a Track Target to a System Target, position the radar cursor over a Track Target and press TMS
Forward. If no System Targets have yet been designated, pressing TMS Right upgrades all Track Targets to
System Targets.




                                                                                     System Target




You can position the acquisition cursor over any System Target to increase its scan priority, making it a Cursor
Target.




                                                                                     Cursor Target




             Scan Limit Lines
The radar will limit its scan to a 3-bar, ±25° pattern centered on that target to provide faster updates and reduce
the chance of losing the Cursor Target. This does not designate the target for AIM-120 employment, only
increases its priority for radar updates.
The Cursor Target can be changed by slewing the cursor to another system target. Slewing away from all system
targets returns the radar to a normal TWS scan.
A System Target can be designated as the Bugged Target by placing the radar cursor over it and pressing TMS
Forward. This changes the scan to a 3-bar, ±25° pattern centered on the bugged target to provide faster
updates and reduce the chance of losing the track.




                                                                                       Bugged Target




              Scan Limit Lines




The Bugged Target is also selected for weapons employment. AIM-9 and AIM-120 DLZ information in the HUD
and FCR format references the Bugged target.
TMS Right will select the closest System Target as the bugged target. Subsequent presses of TMS Right will
cycle through all displayed System Target in range order, making each the Bugged Target in turn.
The Bugged Target can be transitioned to an STT lock by pressing TMS Forward with the cursor over the
Bugged Target. This will transition the radar to STT mode.
Pressing TMS Aft downgrades a Bugged Target to a System Target, or a System Target to a Tracked Target.
Air Combat Mode (ACM)
The Air Combat Mode (ACM) automatically acquires aircraft at short ranges. This mode is used most often when
the target is already acquired visually. The pilot flies the aircraft to position the target in the proper position for
radar acquisition.
Different scan patterns are available in the four different sub-modes:
•    Boresight (BORE)
•    10° × 60° (Vertical Scan)
•    30° × 20° (HUD Scan)
•    Slewable
The radar locks the first target it detects within each sub-mode’s search pattern. Maximum acquisition range is
10 nautical miles. Each sub-mode has its own strengths and weaknesses and is best used in different situations.
ACM may be entered in two ways:
     •    Position the Dogfight/Missile Override (DOGFIGHT) Switch to DGFT. This selects ACM automatically.
          Or,
     •    Press the OSB next to the radar mode and select ACM from the options on the left of the screen.


                 Radar Mode




           Mode Selection




The 30° × 20° sub-mode is entered in a non-radiating (NO RAD) state by default when ACM mode is selected.
The radar is activated when a sub-mode is selected by either cycling through sub-modes on the MFD or using
the Target Management Switch (TMS).
           Sub-mode Selection




HOTAS functions of the TMS in ACM radar mode and the radar as SOI
are:
     •    TMS Forward: Boresight (BORE) Sub-mode
     •    TMS Aft: 10° × 60° (Vertical Scan)
     •    TMS Right: 30° × 20° (HUD Scan)                                   Target Management
                                                                              Switch (4-way)
     •    TMS Left: No function




30° × 20° (HUD Scan) Sub-mode
The 30° × 20° HUD scan pattern searches an area slightly larger than the HUD field of view. The lock range is
10 nautical miles. The radar automatically locks on to the first target in this zone. When locked, the target is
automatically tracked in STT mode.
There is no special HUD symbology for this sub-mode. The FCR format will display “ACM 20.”
                 Scan Zone




This sub-mode is less precise than the BORE sub-mode and may take longer to achieve a lock because of the
larger target area for the radar scan to cover.


Boresight (BORE) Sub-mode
The BORE scan pattern searches a small one-beamwidth area located 3° below the HUD’s gun cross. An additional
Boresight Cross is displayed on the HUD at the center of the radar scan zone to aid in positioning the target in
the radar beam.
The FCR format will display “ACM BORE.”




               Scan Zone


              BORE Cross
BORE is useful for quickly locking a target within visual range (WVR) and allows a degree fine control as to the
target being locked. The first target detected within 20 nautical miles is locked and automatically tracked in STT
mode.

10° × 60° (Vertical Scan) Sub-mode
In the 10° × 60° vertical scan sub-mode, the radar searches an area with 10° in width and 60° in the vertical.
The scan center is 23° above the HUD’s gun cross. This mode is indicated by a vertical line extending from the
gun cross to the bottom of the HUD.
The FCR format will display “ACM 60.”




                 HUD Line




                Scan Zone




The lock range is 10 nautical miles. The radar automatically locks on to the first target in this zone. When locked,
the target is automatically tracked in STT mode.
This mode is most often used during air combat maneuvering (ACM) dogfights. During such fights, you are often
trying to place the target on the lift vector and “pull” the target into the HUD. When in this mode, you can often
lock on to the target earlier, even when it is well above the HUD frame.
ACM Slewable Sub-mode
The scan pattern is approximately 20° high × 60° wide. When selected, the scan is centered directly in front of
the aircraft on the horizon. The scan is slewable via the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch until a target is acquired.
The amount of slew is limited by the radar gimbal limits.
The FCR format will display “ACM SLEW.”
As with the other sub-modes, the radar automatically locks on to the first target in this zone. When locked, the
target is automatically tracked in STT mode.
This mode is useful when you have a direction to look, for example ‘bandits 2 o’clock high’, but have not picked
them up visually yet.


Single Target Track (STT) Mode
After you have locked the target from RWS or ACM sub-modes, the radar will change to STT mode. The radar
now focuses all its energy on a single target and provides constant updates. However, the radar will no longer
detect other contacts and the enemy may be alerted by this radar lock.
The MFD display in STT mode remains much the same as RWS mode with these differences: The locked radar
target is displayed as a circled triangle symbol with a flight vector line. The target’s altitude is displayed below
the target symbol. The top of the display shows aspect angle, ground track (direction the contact is traveling
over the ground), calibrated airspeed, and closure rate.




                                                                                       Closure Rate
              Aspect Angle
                                                                                       Airspeed
              Ground Track




                                                                                       Altitude
              Locked Target
Control (CNTL) Menu
The Control Menu allows configuration of the FCR in air-to-air mode and the air-to-air presentation. Some options
are only applicable to air-to-ground radar modes; the air-to-air options are documented below.




               Moving Target                                                          Channel
               Rejection

               Altitude Tracker


               Target History                                                         Frequency
                                                                                      Agility Band

               Radar Level

                                                                                      Power Management




Channel. Selects the frequency channel the radar uses, 1 through 4 (not implemented). Different aircraft within
a flight should use different channels to avoid radar interference with each other.
Frequency Agility Band. Toggles between wide (WIDE) and narrow (NARO) frequency agility bandwidth (not
implemented). Frequency agility refers to the radar’s technique of randomly hopping between different
frequencies within the agility band, to increase the difficulty of being jammed.
Power Management. Not implemented.
Radar Level. Not implemented.
Target History. Sets the number of frames that a radar return lives (default 3). When set to 1, a radar return
is only displayed during the frame that it is detected. When set to 2, 3, or 4, the radar return is displayed for
additional scan frames, becoming dimmer with each new frame. By setting the target history, you can get a broad
idea of target relative bearing, since the frames will appear to form a line.
Altitude Tracker. Toggles on and off the altitude line tracker/blanker (not implemented). When on, blanks all
targets which are detected at the range of the altitude line.
Moving Target Rejection. Sets the minimum relative velocity that a detected aircraft must have before it is
displayed (Doppler gate). Not implemented.
Expand (EXP) Feature
The radar provides the ability to enter an expanded field of view display that allows sorting and resolution of
closely grouped contacts. This can be thought of as a zoom feature that provides a 4:1 scale view centered
around the radar cursor. This feature is available in all radar modes.
The expanded display may be toggled on or off by selecting the OSB next to NORM/EXP or by pressing the
Expand/FOV Button while the FCR is sensor of interest.




                                                                               Normal Display

                                                                               Closely Grouped
                         Cursor                                                Contacts




The expanded display features a 2 nm × 2 nm reference box centered on the cursor. Basic functions and
symbology are unchanged from the normal display.




                                                                                    Expanded Display

                    Cursor



                                                                                    2nm × 2nm Box
IFF Interrogation
The Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) system allows interrogation of aircraft to determine if they are friendly or
hostile. This is done by transmitting a coded signal aimed at a specific radar contact or volume of space within
the selected radar azimuth and elevation. Transponders in friendly aircraft receive this signal and reply with the
correct coded response.
Contacts are classified based on the
response and symbols identifying contacts
                                                  Master Switch
as friendly or hostile are displayed on the
radar screen. The IFF system is not radar
dependent so interrogation of contacts is still
possible with the radar off.
The IFF Master Switch must be set to NORM
or LOW on the IFF panel to enable IFF
interrogation.




Interrogation is initiated by HOTAS command in one of two modes:
     •    Scan. Press TMS Left-Short (1 second or less) to interrogate all contacts in the radar scan volume.
     •    Line of Sight (LOS). Press TMS Left-Long (more than 1 second) to interrogate the locked target or
          immediate area around the radar cursor.
If the contact is friendly a green circle is drawn around the contact for three seconds. If no reply is received, no
indication is displayed, and the contact is classified as unknown. These contacts may be assumed to be hostile
depending on the rules of engagement (ROE) in your current scenario.




               Friendly Reply



                                                                                       No Reply


            Interrogator Mode
AIR-TO-GROUND MODES
The air-to-ground radar operates in six different selectable modes:
     •    Ground Map (GM)
     •    Ground Moving Target (GMT)
     •    Sea Search (SEA)
In addition, there are three additional modes that the radar uses in certain situations:
     •    Fixed Target Track (FTT)
     •    Air-to-Ground Ranging (AGR)
     •    Situational Awareness Mode (SAM)
Currently, the GM and SEA sub-modes are selectable.


Ground Mapping (GM) Mode
The Ground Mapping mode is a B-scope raster scan of terrain ahead of the aircraft. Image intensity is a function
of the strength of a radar return. Certain ground features will have higher intensity (e.g., buildings or vehicles)
and others will have lower intensity (e.g., water). Terrain or tall structures will impede the radar beam from
traveling further, creating distinctive shadows, giving the resulting image the appearance of an elevation relief
map.
Normally, the radar only scans the area around the SPI, regardless of aircraft location or heading. If the SPI
moves outside the radar field of view, the radar antenna is boresighted. To scan directly ahead of the aircraft
instead, use Snowplow sighting mode.
The ground mapping mode operates in one of four sub-modes:
     •    NORM: Normal mode
     •    EXP: Expanded mode, a 4:1 expansion of the NORM scan area.
     •    DBS1: Doppler beam sharpening mode level 1. The DBS mode can create a higher-resolution image
          than the enhanced ground mapping mode, though it takes longer to render the image. DBS level 1
          produces a 24:1 sharpening. The rendered area is the same size as EXP mode.
     •    DBS2: Doppler beam sharpening mode level 2. Level 2 creates an even sharper image, at 64:1, but
          raster takes three times longer than DBS1. The rendered area depends on range to target, with a
          minimum of 8 NM square.
        Auto/Manual
        Range                                                                           Sub-Mode


                                                                                       Override Mode
        Radar Mode

                                                                                       Control Page

        Gain Indicator
                                                                                       Freeze


                                                                                       Snowplow
        Range

                                                                                       Cursor Zero
        Scan Width

                                                                                       Sighting Option
        RBM/EGM

                                                                                        Time to Go
        B/R to SPI
                                                                                       Crosshairs




Radar Mode. Pressing this OSB displays the radar mode menu. Radar modes will be displayed along the right
side and can be selected with the adjacent OSB. Only GM and SEA are available currently.
Sub-Mode. Cycles between NORM, EXP, DBS1, and DBS2 sub-modes. (See Expanded Sub-modes below for
more information.)
Override Mode. When highlighted, places the radar in standby mode and suppresses radar transmission.
Range. Pressing these OSBs moves between the radar range options: 80, 40, 20, and 10 NM.
Auto/Manual Range. Pressing this OSB toggles between AUTO and MAN (manual) range control. When in
AUTO mode, moving the crosshairs to the top or bottom of the display increases or decreases the range. The
label displays the mode that will be set if the OSB is pressed: AUTO is displayed when manual mode is active,
and MAN is displayed when automatic mode is active.
Gain Indicator. The scale indicates the range of possible radar gain values. The caret indicates the current
radar gain. Radar gain is adjusted with the GAIN rocker to the left. Higher gain values will produce a brighter
image but may wash out details.
Scan Width. Press to cycle between azimuth width options. The radar will only scan inside that azimuthal area.
Options are A6 (60° to each side of center), A2 (20° to each side), and A1 (10° to each side). Decreasing scan
azimuth will increase refresh rate but hinder situational awareness.
RBM/EGM. Toggles between Real Beam Mode (RBM) or Enhanced Ground Map (EGM). RBM uses raw radar
data to quickly produce an image. EGM uses post-processing to improve the image resolution but takes longer
to render an image. When EGM is on, only the center portion of the radar image is post-processed. EGM is not
available at large bank angles.
Crosshairs. The crosshairs indicate the current sensor point of interest (SPI). When not in Snowplow sighting
mode, the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch may be used to move the crosshairs and change the SPI.
B/R to SPI. Displays the bearing and range from the aircraft’s position to the SPI.
Time to Go. Displays the time (minutes:seconds) until reaching the SPI.
Control Page. Pressing displays the Control menu. See Control (CNTL) Menu.
Freeze. Pressing this OSB puts the radar in standby mode and freezes the current radar image on the display.
(See Freeze function below for more information.)
Snowplow (SP). Pressing this OSB moves the crosshairs to the center of the display and causes the radar to
scan in front of the aircraft, regardless of its location relative to the SPI. (See Snowplow Sighting Mode for more
information.)
Cursor Zero (CZ). Zeroizes cursor slews. (See Cursor Zero for more information.)
Sighting Option. Cycles the selected sighting point. (See Sighting Points and Cursor Corrections for more
information.)
When in GM mode, pressing TMS Forward designates a target. Pressing TMS Aft un-designates that target. (See
Fixed Target Track for more information.)
Pressing the Expand/FOV button cycles between the different sub-modes (NORM, EXP, DBS1, and DBS2).


Expanded Sub-Modes
The expanded sub-modes cannot resolve radar information directly ahead of the aircraft’s nose. When using an
expanded sub-mode, only off-azimuth radar data will be shown.
When in an expanded sub-mode, the crosshairs are fixed at the center of the screen, and using the RDR
CURSOR/ENABLE switch slews the image, not the crosshairs.




       Yardstick




Yardstick. Indicates a ¼ nautical mile distance.
Freeze (FZ) Function
When OSB 7 is pressed, the Freeze function is activated. The radar image will freeze. If the radar continues to
maintain line of sight to the imaged area, the image will continue to refresh with subsequent scans, though the
location and bounds of the image will not change. If the radar loses LOS, it will coast, and the last scanned
composite image will be preserved on the display.



                                                                                            Crosshair
                                                                                            Coordinates




                                                                                            Ownship



                                                                                            Crosshairs




         B/D          to
         Crosshairs




Crosshairs. Used to designate a target. Controlled by the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch. When the radar is
coasting, the crosshair center is displayed as a hollow box. When the radar is actively scanning the crosshair
area, the crosshairs center is displayed as a filled triangle.
Ownship. Displays the location of the aircraft within the radar image. Not displayed if the aircraft is outside the
radar image dimensions.
Bearing and Distance to Crosshairs. Displays the bearing and distance from the present position (represented
by the ownship) to the crosshairs.
Crosshair Coordinates. Displays latitude and longitude of crosshair position. Holding TMS Aft temporarily
blanks this text.
Fixed Target Track (FTT)
When a location is designated with TMS Forward, the radar enters FTT sub-mode. This sub-mode has identical
symbology and operation to the FZ (Freeze) function, described above, although the radar beam remains locked
on the designated location and is no longer used to create a raster image.
FTT is appropriate for tracking fixed ground targets or slow-moving sea targets such as ships. To track moving
land targets or fast-moving sea targets, use Ground Moving Target (GMT) mode (will be implemented later).
When in FTT, the designated location becomes the SPI. The radar will continue to track the target location while
line-of-sight is maintained. If LOS is lost, the radar will coast for 10 seconds before the radar returns to GM or
SEA mode. If the designated location moves outside the radar field of view, the radar will slew to boresight until
the target returns into the radar FOV, at which point the radar will reacquire the target. If the target remains
outside the radar FOV for 60 seconds, the radar will return to GM or SEA.




                                                                                          Situational
                                                                                          Awareness Cue




Situational Awareness Cue. The point about which the map has been expanded.
Sea Search (SEA) Mode
SEA mode works identically to GM mode (see above). SEA mode is appropriate for tracking slow-moving or
stationary objects on the water’s surface.




                                                                                 Radar Return
TACTICAL NET DATALINK
 TACTICAL NET DATALINK
TACTICAL NET DATALINK (TNDL)
The F-16C utilizes a Multifunction Information Distribution System Low Volume Terminal (MIDS LVT) that allows
the transmission and reception of tactical data over the Tactical Net Datalink (TNDL). This datalink network allows
multiple platforms to exchange data with other friendly forces to collectively maintain a common tactical picture
of the battlespace.
The MIDS LVT also provides the F-16C with TACAN functions for radio-based navigation. As such, the MIDS LVT
must be operational to utilize ground-based TACAN navigational beacons or employ air-to-air distance measuring
functions. (See Tactical Air Navigation in the Navigation chapter for more information.)




TNDL allows various air and surface platforms to cooperatively build situational awareness and facilitate command
and control. The datalink system utilizes secure radio signals across numerous frequencies, which provides
resistance to jamming and permits multiple network channels to function simultaneously within the same
geographic region.
TNDL data may be received from Flight/Team members, Donors, C2 Platforms, and other TNDL participants.
Flight/Team Member. Flight/Team member data permits efficient coordination of flight maneuvers, sensor
data, and weapons and engagement deconfliction. A maximum of 8 aircraft may be present within the F-16
Flight/Team member list, to include the ownship; which communicate on the Fighter Channel.
Donor. Similar data may be received from participants that are not part of the ownship’s flight but may be
operating within the same “mission package”. These participants are known as Donors, of which a maximum of
4 may be present within the F-16 Donor list; which normally communicate on the Fighter Channel.
C2 Platform. Data received from C2 (Command and Control) platforms provide broader situational awareness
by transmitting position and identification of TNDL participants on other network channels, position and
identification of friendly platforms that are not TNDL participants, or position and identification data of hostile air
or surface units. C2 platforms communicate with non-C2 participants using a dedicated Mission channel.
Participant. Position and identification data is received from TNDL participants that are on the same channel
but are not designated as a Flight/Team member, a Donor, or a C2 platform.
Tactical Net Datalink (TNDL) Network
Each participant on a TNDL network periodically transmits identification, position, and/or targeting data over the
assigned network channel(s). Since each participant cannot transmit and receive data at the same time, nor can
multiple participants transmit data simultaneously without potentially interfering with the other, TNDL participants
transmit their data within pre-allocated and synchronized intervals. This method of network management is
known as Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) and designates a time slot for each participant in which they may
transmit data. As such, the TDMA and anti-jam nature of TNDL requires all network participants that are on the
same channel to maintain synchronization through a common timing signal, which may be provided by GPS.
                                                    GPS Satellite


                                                     Timing Signal




                                                                     One participant transmits data
                                                                       during allocated time slot

                                                                         TNDL Message: PPLI
                                                                         STN: 57740


 TNDL Channel: 1
 Time Slot: 1


                                                                                                      TNDL Message: PPLI
                                                                                                      STN: 57741


 TNDL Channel: 1
 Time Slot: 2


                                          TNDL Message: PPLI
                                          STN: 57742


 TNDL Channel: 1
 Time Slot: 3


                   TNDL Message: PPLI
                   STN: 57743


 TNDL Channel: 1
 Time Slot: 4

                         Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) Datalink Transmissions

Multiple types of messages may be transmitted by TNDL network participants, which may simply identify another
TNDL participant’s position, or it may include information that is intended for a specific recipient on the network.
These messages are processed within the avionics in various ways, depending on the type of message, the source
of the message, and the channel over which the message was received.
Each participant within a TNDL network is assigned a Source Track Number (STN) consisting of five octal numbers,
where each digit may be 0 through 7. When a TNDL message is received by the MIDS LVT, the STN embedded
within the message is used to identify the source of the message. The MIDS LVT compares the STN to those that
have been programmed as the ownship’s Flight/Team members or Donors. If the STN matches that of a
Flight/Team member or a Donor, the data within the message is presented to the pilot accordingly on the relevant
MFD formats. If the STN does not match that of a Flight/Team member or a Donor, and the message type is not
a PPLI or a C2 message (such as Surveillance Tracks), the data within the message is discarded.
TNDL Channels
The MIDS LVT can monitor three TNDL channels simultaneously, the Fighter Channel, Mission Channel, and
Special Channel, each with a unique tactical function. Each TNDL channel functions as a separate datalink network
and may be tuned independently of the others. The Special Channel (SC) is not implemented in DCS: F-16C.
Fighter Channel (FC)
The Fighter channel is intended for Fighter-to-Fighter data messaging, which facilitates cooperative targeting and
engagement amongst Flight/Team members and Donors. A maximum of four Flight members (including the
ownship), four Team members, and four Donors may be configured within each F-16C.

              F-15 “Ford 5” Flight                                                          F/A-18 “Roman 1” Flight




                             Donor 1                                                           Donor 4      Donor 3
                Donor 2                           F-16 “Weasel 2” Flight




                                                                Team Member 5
                                              Team Member 7                            Team Member 6
                             Team Member 8

                                                    F-16 “Weasel 1” Flight




                                                                             Ownship
                                         Flight Member 3                                                 Flight Member 2
           Flight Member 4


                                                TNDL Fighter Channel

All network participants will periodically transmit data messages that include identification, position, sensor tracks,
target sorting, and/or weapon engagement data. However, depending on whether a participant’s STN has been
programmed within the ownship as a Flight/Team member, a Donor, or neither, this data will either be
retained/updated within the avionics and presented to the pilot, or rejected and purged without pilot interaction.
     Flight Member (1-4). Message types received from Flight members include Present Position (PPLI), Air
     Target Tracks (including lock lines and shot lines), Markpoints, SEAD Targets, and TDOA Tracks.
     Team Member (5-8). Message types received from Team members include Present Position (PPLI), Air
     Target Tracks (lock lines and shot lines are not displayed), Markpoints, SEAD Targets, and TDOA Tracks.
     Donor. Message types received from Donors include Present Position (PPLI), Air Target Tracks (lock lines
     and shot lines are not displayed), and Markpoints.
     Participant. Message types received from participants that are neither Flight/Team members nor Donors
     are limited to Present Position (PPLI).
In the example above, all of the F-15 and F/A-18 aircraft are transmitting Air Target Track data across the same
Fighter Channel. However, the ownship in “Weasel 1” Flight will only retain Air Target Tracks received from two
of the four F-15’s of “Ford 5” Flight and two of the four F/A-18’s of “Roman 1” Flight, since the STN’s of those
participants have been programmed as Donors within the ownship. Air Target Track data received from the
remaining F-15’s and F/A-18’s are still received by the ownship, but this data is purged since the STN’s of those
participants are not programmed as Donors, and only their PPLI data is retained and updated.
Mission Channel (MC)
The Mission channel is intended for Surveillance data messaging, which facilitates situation awareness from C2
Platform participants, such as E-3A or E-2D AWACS aircraft.

                                                  E-3A “Darkstar 2-1”




              F-15 “Ford 5” Flight               TNDL Message: C2                  F/A-18 “Roman 1” Flight
                                                 Air Surveillance Tracks




                                                F-16 “Weasel 2” Flight




                                                 F-16 “Weasel 1” Flight




                                             TNDL Mission Channel

The C2 Platforms will transmit position data of all aircraft detected within the volume of airspace it is capable of
monitoring and will update these positions periodically. As the AWACS radar scans the battlespace, the AWACS
crew will concurrently perform interrogations of each detected aircraft’s Mode 4 IFF transponder to assess each
aircraft’s coalition affiliation. This allows the AWACS crew to monitor the positions of friendly aircraft that are not
transmitting PPLI messages across the TNDL Mission channel, or to detect and classify potentially hostile aircraft.
     C2 Platform. Message types received from C2 Platforms include Present Position (PPLI) of the C2 aircraft
     itself and Air Surveillance Tracks.
All non-C2 network participants will periodically transmit data messages that include identification and position.
However, even if a participant’s PPLI is not directly received by other participants due to terrain obstructing line-
of-sight (LOS), the positions of friendly aircraft may still be received by the C2 Platform and relayed across the
Mission channel to other friendly aircraft that would otherwise not receive the PPLI across either TNDL channel.
The C2 Platform may also transmit mission assignments or targeting data across the Mission channel to specific
flights of participating aircraft, which facilitates efficient command and control of the battlespace. Although the
mission assignment and targeting data is transmitted to all members within a flight, only the participants that
have been designated as a Flight Lead will have the ability to accept or reject a mission assignment.
(See TNDL DED page for more information.)
TNDL Messages and Tracks
Depending on the type of message being transmitted, TNDL messages may be transmitted over the corresponding
TNDL channels automatically without pilot interaction, or they may be transmitted on command by the pilot.
Automatic messages may be transmitted periodically at pre-determined intervals, or they may be automatically
transmitted when specific criteria have been met.
Fighter-to-Fighter Messages                               Surveillance and C2 Messages
Situational awareness, targeting, coordination.           Situational awareness, command and control.
•    PPLI Location/identification of TNDL participant     •    PPLI Location/identification of TNDL participant
•    Fighter Air Target Track Position of aircraft        •    Surveillance Air Target Track Position of
     detected by friendly, radar-equipped fighter              aircraft detected/relayed by AWACS platform
•    Markpoint Tactical reference point
•    SEAD Target Location of air defense threat
•    TDOA Track Air defense radar timing/position
     data contributed by HTS-equipped fighter
When a TNDL message is received that includes position data of either a network participant or a target detected
by the sensors of a network participant, a “track” is generated and maintained within the ownship’s system track
file for a short period of time. When new position data for the same track is received, which may also include
velocity data such as course and speed, the “track” is updated accordingly, similar to a radar-generated track.
TNDL Symbols
Precise Participant Location Identification (PPLI). PPLI tracks are received from other TNDL participants
on the Fighter Channel or Mission Channel and identified as Flight/Team members or Donors based on the
received Source Track Numbers (STN) within the PPLI message.
                             FLIGHT/TEAM                DONOR        PARTICIPANT

          PPLI


          PPLI
    CORRELATED WITH
      OWNSHIP FCR



Fighter/Surveillance Air Targets. Air target tracks are received from Flight/Team members and Donors on
the Fighter Channel and by C2 platforms, such as AWACS, on the Mission Channel.
                                FRIENDLY               UNKNOWN          SUSPECT              HOSTILE

     FIGHTER /
 SURVEILLANCE TRACK

     FIGHTER /
 SURVEILLANCE TRACK
    CORRELATED WITH
      OWNSHIP FCR

         Air target tracks displayed on the FCR                     Air target tracks displayed on the FCR
         format will include a number above the                     format will include an “M” above the
         symbol if the target is bugged by the                      symbol if the target is bugged by multiple
         corresponding Fight/Team member.                           Flight/Team members and/or Donors.
         Air target tracks displayed on the FCR                     Air target tracks displayed on the HSD
         format will include a four-character                       format will include a lock line leading to
         callsign above the symbol if the target is                 the symbol if the target is bugged by a
         bugged by the corresponding Donor.                         Flight member (1-4 only).

Markpoints. Markpoints correspond with steerpoints or SPI locations that are received from Flight/Team
members or Donors on the Fighter Channel. Markpoints are displayed on the HSD format.
SEAD Targets. SEAD targets correspond with designated air defense threats that are received from Flight/Team
members or Donors on the Fighter Channel. SEAD targets are displayed on the HSD format.
                              MARKPOINT               SEAD TARGET

    OTHER SYMBOLS



         Markpoints displayed on the HSD format                     SEAD targets displayed on the HSD
         will include a lock line leading to the                    format will include a lock line leading to
         symbol if transmitted by a Flight member                   the symbol if designated by the
         (1-4 only) with a sensor in a tracking                     transmitting Flight member (1-4 only).
         state.
Tactical Net Datalink (TNDL) Configuration
The F-16C requires four elements to participate within the TNDL network itself and transmit/receive data from
wingmen, other aircraft that are part of the same “mission package”, or AWACS aircraft.
TNDL Network Synchronization. Due to the Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) nature of the TNDL
network, the chronometer within the ownship’s MIDS LVT must be synchronized with the network time reference.
TNDL Channel Selection. All Flight/Team members and Donors must be set to the same Fighter Channel to
transmit and receive Fighter-to-Fighter messages. The ownship must be set to the same Mission Channel as the
designated C2 platform (AWACS) to receive Surveillance and C2 messages.
Ownship Identification. The Voice Callsign and Source Track Number (STN) transmitted by the ownship over
the TNDL network should correspond with the ownship’s pre-planned flight callsign.
Configuration of Source Track Number(s). The STNs assigned to Flight members and/or Team members on
the TNDL STN DED page must match the STNs that are transmitted by each Flight/Team member over the TNDL
network. Donor STNs must be configured prior to the mission and cannot be configured from within the cockpit.
Prior to powering the MIDS LVT, the following criteria must be met.
•    The INS alignment must be complete and in NAV mode.
•    If intending to use GPS signals as the timing reference for network synchronization, the GPS receiver must
     be powered on the AVIONICS POWER control panel and fully initialized before the MIDS LVT knob is set to
     the ON position. This can be verified by ensuring “GPS SYSTEM” is displayed on the TIME DED page.
     NOTE: GPS will only be available if the DCS mission date is 28 March 1994 or later. In addition, GPS precision
     will be degraded unless “USA” is one of the countries assigned to the player’s coalition within the DCS
     mission. However, these limitations may be overridden if both of the following conditions are true:
     o    Unrestricted SATNAV is enabled in the player’s GAMEPLAY options or is enforced as enabled in the
          Mission Options for the mission being played.
     o    Unrestricted SATNAV is not enforced as disabled in the Mission Options for the mission being played.
•    The Network Time Reference (NTR) should be disabled on the NET STATUS DED page unless the ownship
     is acting as the NTR-transmitting unit for all other TNDL participants on the network.


MIDS LVT Initialization
The MIDS LVT knob powers Multifunctional Information
Distribution System.
•    ZERO. Zeroizes sensitive data within MIDS LVT
     internal memory.
•    OFF. Disables power to the MIDS LVT.
•    ON. Enables power to the MIDS LVT.
Once the MIDS LVT is powered, the pilot may access the
DLNK DED pages to confirm or modify the TNDL settings,
if necessary, as described on the following pages.
NET STATUS DED Page
The Net Status DED page is accessed by pressing ENTR on the ICP keypad when the LIST DED page is displayed.
This page is used to configure the MIDS LVT timing reference and view the network synchronization status.
                                                      1. Selected Steerpoint



                         2. GPS Time
                                                                                                        6. DED Asterisks
                  3. Network Time

         4. Network Time Reference

 5. Network Synchronization Status                                                                      7. Page Number



                                                                                                Move DED asterisks to
                Modify                              Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                          Reject
                                                                                  Return DED                               Cycle DED to
                                          Accept                                                                            TNDL page
                                                                                  to CNI page




                                Operate            Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                                to the next data field


1.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
2.   GPS Time. Enables/disables GPS time as the source of the ownship’s timing signal. May be toggled between
     ON and OFF by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while the DED asterisks are over the data field.
3.   Network Time. Displays the TNDL network time in a 24-hour time format based on Zulu time (UTC). When
     GPS is being used as the timing source, this data field is blanked. May be modified by placing the DED
     asterisks over the data field, entering a time in HHMMSS format using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
4.   Network Time Reference (NTR). Enables/disables the transmission of the NTR from the ownship to
     other TNDL participants. May be toggled between ON and OFF by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while
     the DED asterisks are over the data field.
5.   Network Synchronization Status. Displays the ownship’s synchronization quality with the TNDL network.
     •       (Blank). The MIDS LVT is unable to synchronize with the TNDL network. TNDL messages cannot be
             received nor transmitted.
     •       INPROG. The MIDS LVT is attempting to synchronize with the TNDL network. TNDL messages cannot
             be received nor transmitted.
     •       COARSE. The MIDS LVT has achieved a coarse synchronization with the TNDL network. TNDL
             messages may be received but not transmitted.
     •       FINE. The MIDS LVT has achieved a fine synchronization with the TNDL network. TNDL messages may
             be received and transmitted.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
7.   Page Number. Displays the DED page number and indicates that additional pages may be viewed.
TNDL DED Page
The Tactical Net Datalink page is accessed by pressing ENTR on the ICP when the LIST DED page is displayed,
and then momentarily setting the ICP DCS to the SEQ position. This page is used to configure TNDL channels,
the ownship Callsign and Flight Lead setting, and the transmission power setting of the MIDS LVT.
                                               1. Selected Steerpoint




           2. Fighter Channel                                                                    5. Voice Callsign

           3. Mission Channel                                                                    6. Flight Lead Identifier

           4. Special Channel                                                                    7. Transmit Power

                                                                                                 8. Page Number

                                                                9. DED Asterisks

                                                                                          Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                             Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                    Reject
                                                                            Return DED                                Cycle DED to
                                    Accept                                                                           TNDL STN page
                                                                            to CNI page




                          Operate            Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                          to the next data field


1.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
2.   Fighter Channel (FC). Displays the TNDL channel over which the MIDS will transmit/receive Fighter-to-
     Fighter data from Flight/Team members and Donors. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the
     data field, entering a channel between 1 and 126 using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. (N/I)
3.   Mission Channel (MC). Displays the TNDL channel over which the MIDS will receive Surveillance data
     from C2 platforms, such as AWACS. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field,
     entering a channel between 1 and 126 using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. (N/I)
4.   Special Channel (SC). Not implemented.
5.   Voice Callsign. Displays the ownship’s identification transmitted to other TNDL participants. The letters
     may be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, using the ICP Increment/Decrement rocker
     to select a different letter, and then pressing ENTR. The numbers may be modified by placing the DED
     asterisks over the data field, inputting different values using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
6.   Flight Lead (FL) Identifier. When set to YES, the ownship is designated as the Flight Leader within the
     Flight/Team member list. May be toggled between YES and NO by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while
     the DED asterisks are over the data field. Only one aircraft within the flight should enable this option. (N/I)
7.   Transmit Power (XMT). Selects the MIDS power setting for outgoing transmissions. May be cycled
     between HI, MED, LO, and NONE by pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 while the DED asterisks are over
     the data field. When set to NONE, MIDS transmissions are inhibited.
8.   Page Number. Displays the DED page number and indicates that additional pages may be viewed.
9.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted.
TNDL STN DED Page
The Tactical Net Datalink Source Track Number page is accessed by pressing ENTR on the ICP when the LIST
DED page is displayed, and then momentarily setting the ICP DCS to the SEQ position as necessary. This page is
used to configure the STN for each Flight/Team member, designate the TDOA sub-team if necessary, and
designate the ownship’s position within the flight.
                                                  1. Selected Steerpoint




          2. Flight/Team Member

              3. TDOA Sub-team                                                                       5. Ownship Identifier

         4. Source Track Number
                                                                                                     6. Page Number


                                                                   7. DED Asterisks

                                                                                         Move DED asterisks to
          Modify                            Cycle to next steerpoint                     the previous data field


                                  Reject
                                                                           Return DED                                Cycle DED to
                                  Accept                                   to CNI page                             NET STATUS page




                       Operate             Cycle to previous steerpoint                   Move DED asterisks
                                                                                         to the next data field


1.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
2.   Flight/Team Member. Identifies the Source Track Number for each Flight member (1-4) and each Team
     member (5-8).
3.   TDOA Sub-team (T). A “T” symbol in this data field indicates that the corresponding Flight/Team members
     are designated as the TDOA sub-team within the flight. May be toggled by pressing any ICP keypad button
     1-9 while the DED asterisks are around the data field between the Flight/Team member number and the
     member’s STN.
4.   Source Track Number. The Source Track Number (STN) will determine how outgoing messages are
     recognized by other participants, and how incoming messages intended for the ownship are recognized.
     May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, entering a 5-digit number using the ICP
     keypad, and pressing ENTR. Each digit of the STN may be 0 through 7; for a total of 32,768 unique STN
     numbers.
5.   Ownship Identifier (OWN). Displays the ownship’s position within the flight. This data field determines
     the STN that the ownship will utilize when transmitting TNDL messages, or when receiving TNDL messages
     intended for a specific recipient. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, entering
     a number within the range of 1 through 8 using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR.
6.   Page Number. Displays the DED page number and indicates that additional pages may be viewed.
7.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted.
Datalink Mission Editor Options
Mission creators may configure the datalink settings for each
aircraft within the Mission Editor. These settings are located
on the Aircraft Additional Properties and Datalinks tabs.           Aircraft Additional
                                                                      Properties tab
Aircraft Additional Properties. Allows the mission creator
to configure any remaining properties that are unique to the
aircraft type.
•    Voice Callsign Label. This data field will determine
     the first two characters of the participant’s identification
     within the cockpit of other TNDL participants on the
     network. Any combination of two letters may be
     entered.
•    Voice Callsign Number. This data field will determine
     the final two characters of the participant’s identification
     within the cockpit of other TNDL participants on the
     network. Any combination of two numbers may be
     entered.
•    Source Track Number. The Source Track Number will
     determine how outgoing messages are recognized by
     other participants, and how incoming messages
     intended for the ownship are recognized. The STN
     consists of 5 numeric digits, with each digit limited to a
     range of 0-7; for a total of 32,768 unique STN numbers.
     NOTE: Each participant, to include the ownship, must
     have a unique STN. If two or more participants on the
     same datalink network are assigned the same source
     track number, erroneous behavior may be observed
     when using the datalink, or when using functions within
     the cockpit that are associated with the datalink.                                   Datalinks


Datalinks – SETTING tab. Allows the mission creator to
configure the details on the second DLNK DED page.
•    Fighter Channel. This data field configures the TNDL
     channel to be used for Fight-to-Fighter data messages.
     (N/I)
•    Mission Channel. This data field configures the TNDL
     channel to be used for Surveillance data messages.
     (N/I)
•    Special Channel. Not implemented.
•    Voice Callsign. This data field repeats the Voice
     Callsign from the Aircraft Additional Properties tab.
•    Flight Lead. This checkbox designates the selected
     aircraft as the Flight Lead for incoming TNDL messages.
     (N/I)
•    Transmit Power. This setting determines the
     ownship’s transmission power for outgoing messages.
(See TNDL DED page for more information.)
Datalinks – NETWORK tab. Allows the mission creator to
configure the Flight/Team member and Donor lists for the
current F-16 selected within the Mission Editor.                                                      Datalinks

•   MBR #. Displays the STN index of each network
    participant within the corresponding list. A maximum of
    8 participants may be present on the list of Flight/Team
    members. A maximum of 4 participants may be present
    on the list of Donors.
    NOTE: Only the Flight/Team members may be edited
    from within the cockpit via the TNDL STN DED page.
    Donors cannot be edited from within the cockpit.
•   TDOA. This checkbox determines which Flight/Team
    members are enabled for cooperative TDOA functions
    using the HARM Targeting System (HTS) pod.
    (See HARM Targeting System for more information.)
•   PILOT NAME. Displays the name of each network
    participant.
•   CALLSIGN. Displays the Voice Callsign of the network
    participant.
•   STN. Displays the source track number of each network
    participant.
•   Del. When the red “trash can” icon within this column
    is selected, the network participant will be removed
    from the corresponding list. The ownship cannot be
    deleted from the Flight/Team member list, and will not
    display a red “trash can” icon within the list.
•   Groups Selection/ADD Button. Displays options for selecting other Airplane Groups within the mission.
    Only TNDL-capable Airplane Groups that are of the same coalition and not already present within the
    corresponding list will be available for selection.
    When the ADD button is pressed, all aircraft within the selected Airplane Group will be added to the
    corresponding list.
•   Units Selection/ADD Button. Displays options for selecting individual aircraft within the mission. Only
    TNDL-capable aircraft that are of the same coalition not already present within the corresponding list will be
    available for selection.
    When the ADD button is pressed, the selected aircraft will be added to the corresponding list.
PRECISE PARTICIPANT LOCATION
IDENTIFICATION (PPLI)
The most common message type automatically transmitted across a TNDL network is a PPLI message. PPLI
messages identify the transmitting participant’s platform type, callsign, three-dimensional location, course and
speed, and source track number (STN). When a PPLI message is received from another network participant, the
STN is compared to an STN list uploaded into the avionics to determine if the participant is a Flight/Team member
or a Donor. The nature of this track is then displayed on the FCR, HSD, and HAD formats of either MFD, which
will reflect the location of the participant and how the PPLI is affiliated to the ownship’s flight.
                                                                PPLI MESSAGE
                                                                Identification: F-16 WL11
                                                                Location: Coordinates
                                                                            Altitude
                                                                            Course/Speed
                                     WL11 symbol and data       STN: 57740                       WL11 symbol and data
         WL11 symbol and data        displayed within cockpit                                    displayed within cockpit
         displayed within cockpit


                                                                  F-16 “Weasel 1-1”
                                       F-16 “Weasel 1-3”                                              F-16 “Weasel 1-2”
          F-16 “Weasel 1-4”
                                                       PPLI Message

1.   PPLI Symbol. Indicates the affiliation of the participant to the ownship’s flight. Since any aircraft
     transmitting PPLI messages on the TNDL network are friendly, all PPLI symbols received from other aircraft
     will be displayed as a circle.
     •      Flight/Team members are colored blue.                                           1. PPLI Symbol      2. Wingman ID

     •      All other friendly aircraft are colored green.
2.   Wingman ID. Indentifies the PPLI as a Flight/Team member or Donor.
                                                                                        3. Altitude                       4. Vector
     •      Flight members will be identified as 1-4.
     •      Team members will be identified as 5-8.                                             PPLI Track Symbol

     •      Donors will be identified by a dot within the symbol.
     •      Participants that are neither Flight/Team members nor Donors will be displayed with a blank symbol.
3.   Altitude. Indicates the participant’s altitude above mean sea level (MSL), in increments of 1,000 feet. In
     this example, the participant is at an altitude of approximately 20,000 feet MSL.
4.   Vector. Indicates the relative course line of the participant.
PPLI tracks are correlated with other TNDL data to avoid duplicate tracks. When a PPLI message is received, the
STN embedded within the message is compared to existing TNDL tracks. If any existing tracks are referenced to
the same STN, whether the tracks are generated from PPLI messages or from Surveillance tracks, the most recent
data is used and the old data is purged. For example, if two aircraft were transmitting PPLI messages with
identical STN data, the PPLI symbol on the MFD would alternate, or “mipple”, between the positions of each
aircraft as each aircraft’s PPLI was cyclically updated during the TNDL transmit interval.
HANDS-ON CONTROLS
The UHF VHF Transmit switch on the Throttle controls the datalink information that is displayed on the FCR MFD
format and transmits datalink messages across the TNDL.
•    Pressing IFF IN (right/inboard) using a short press (<0.5 sec) cycles the datalink filter setting on the FCR
     MFD format.
•    Pressing IFF OUT (left/outboard) using a short press (<0.5 sec) toggles the display of all datalink information
     on the FCR MFD format.
•    Pressing inboard with a long press (>0.5 sec) controls transmissions to Flight/Team members over the
     selected datalink.
                                                                                      UHF VHF Transmit Switch (4-way)

                     Transmit over VHF Radio

                                               Cycle Datalink
       Toggle Datalink                         Filters on FCR
       Info on FCR                             Transmit STPT, SPI, or
                                               SEAD Target over Datalink

                     Transmit over UHF Radio


      Short press (<0.5 sec)

      Long press (>0.5 sec)

      Continuous press
 LITENING II TARGETING
LITENING
 POD     II TARGETING POD
LITENING II TARGETING POD
The AN/AAQ-28 Litening II Targeting Pod (TGP) enables the F-16C to electro-optically search, acquire, track, and
designate targets on the ground or in the air, during day or night. The Litening pod can be used to perform
reconnaissance from high altitudes, laser designate ground targets for engagement by precision-guided
munitions, or even optically identify aircraft from long-range.




                        AN/AAQ-28 Reconnaissance, Targeting, and Designation

The Litening II targeting pod includes four sensors within a steerable turret located on the forward face of the
pod itself: a charge-coupled device (CCD) TV camera, a forward looking infrared (FLIR) thermographic camera,
a laser rangefinder/designator for designating targets or ground locations, and a laser spot tracker for detecting
offboard laser designations.


Targeting Pod Activation
The TGP (if equipped) is powered through the right “chin”
hardpoint along the center fuselage, just aft of the engine intake.
This is accomplished by positioning the RIGHT HDPT switch to the
forward position on the SNSR PWR control panel on the right
console.
The TGP will require approximately 2 minutes to initialize, perform self-tests, and cool down the FLIR sensor.
During this time, the TGP MFD format will display a “NOT TIMED OUT” message along with a “FLIR NOT COOL”
advisory.
The targeting pod cannot function without the MMC, ST STA, UFC, or MFD avionics systems, or without a properly
aligned INS.
Mode Selection
You may change modes by pressing the OSB 1 adjacent to STBY. The following options will be displayed
depending on Master Mode.




              Current Mode


              A-A Mode Select                                                         A-G Mode Select




                                                                                       STBY Mode Select




A-A Mode Select. Pressing this OSB selects A-A mode.
A-G Mode Select. Pressing this OSB selects A-G mode.
STBY Mode Select. Pressing this OSB selects STBY mode.


The main function modes and sub-modes for the TGP include:
     •    Standby (STBY)
     •    Air-to-Ground (A-G)
                o     Slave (Ground)
                o     AREA Track
                o     POINT Track
                o     INR Track
                o     Laser Spot Search (LSS)
     •    Air-to-Air (A-A)
     •    Slave (Body)
                o     POINT Track
                o     RATE Track
                o     HUD
Each of these modes also has a Control Page that provides you with the ability to configure TGP features.
After initialization is complete, the LASR DED page can be used to set the laser codes for the TGP laser designator
and laser spot tracker, along with the automatic laser designation time setting.
LASR DED Page
The Laser DED page is accessed by pressing 5/CRUS on the ICP keypad when the MISC DED page is displayed
on the DED. This page is used to configure the targeting pod (if equipped) for laser ranging and designation
operations.
NOTE: The TGP and LST CODE data fields cannot be edited if the targeting pod is powered off or still initializing.
When the pod has fully initialized and is in STBY mode, these data fields will accept data entry.



            1. TGP Designation Code                                                             4. DED Asterisks

          2. Laser Spot Tracker Code

                    3. Laser Start Time



                                                                                 Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                                 No function                    the previous data field


                                      Reject
                                                                   Return DED                              No function
                                      Accept                       to CNI page




                            Operate              No function                      Move DED asterisks
                                                                                 to the next data field


5.   TGP Designation Code. Displays the laser PRF code that will be emitted from the targeting pod’s laser
     rangefinder/designator (LRFD). May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting
     a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid entries include PRF codes 1111-1788 or PIM codes
     2111-2888.
6.   Laser Spot Tracker Code. Displays the laser PRF code that the targeting pod’s laser spot tracker (LST)
     will search for when enabled. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a
     value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid entries include PRF codes 1111-1788 or PIM codes
     2111-2888.
7.   Laser Start Time. Displays the Time-To-Impact value at which the targeting pod will automatically begin
     laser designation for terminal guidance of laser-guided munitions. May be modified by placing the DED
     asterisks over the data field, inputting a time between 0 and 176 seconds using the ICP keypad, and pressing
     ENTR. A time of 0 will disable automatic laser designation.
8.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
To employ laser-guided munitions autonomously, the TGP designation code on this page must match the pre-
programmed laser code on the bomb guidance sections. Note that the F-16C can only be equipped with laser-
guided munitions that can guide on laser PRF codes between 1511 and 1788, despite the F-16C targeting pod’s
capabilities to designate outside of this PRF range. (See Terminal Laser Guidance Codes for more information.)
When performing targeting operations within the flight, it is often advantageous to set the LST code to the
wingman’s TGP designation code during run-up. This technique can facilitate an immediate target handover
between aircraft when both targeting pods are oriented in the same geographic area, by simply setting the TGP
as SOI and depressing the MAN RNG/UNCAGE knob to initiate a Laser Spot Search (LSS).
STANDBY (STBY) MODE
This will be the first TGP mode screen displayed upon activation of the TGP. After the “NOT TIMED OUT” message
has been removed (after 3 minutes), the mode may be exited by selecting one of the other two TGP modes or
the standby control page.



                                                                                   Override Select

                                                                                   STBY Control Page Select
             Current Mode
                                                                                   Radar Altitude

                                                                                   Sensor Type


             Field of View and                                                     Laser Spot Search Code
             Zoom Factor




Current Mode. This is the mode the TGP is currently in.
Field of View. Pressing this OSB toggles between Narrow Field of View (NFOV) or Wide Field of View (WFOV).
These views can vary between the CCD and FLIR sensors in the TGP.
     •    FLIR field of view:
               o     Wide Field of View (WFOV) is 4° × 4°
               o     Narrow Field of View (NFOV) is 1° × 1°
     •    CCD field of view:
               o     Wide Field of View (WFOV) is 3.5° × 3.5°
               o     Narrow Field of View (NFOV) is 1° by 1°
Zoom Factor. Within an FOV selection, you may additionally adjust the zoom-factor by zooming in and out with
the RANGE knob. The zoom range goes from 0Z (no zoom) to 9Z (highest level of zoom within FOV). Objects
within the TGP field of view double in size from 0 to 9 zoom.
OVRD Select. Pressing this OSB overrides any current mode and returns to STBY. The last selected mode is
returned to when OVRD is selected a second time.
STBY Control Page Select. Pressing this OSB selects the STBY Control Page. Options and functions are
described below.
Radar Altitude. The current radar altitude is displayed.
Sensor Type. Displayed in the upper right corner, this text field indicates the current video mode that the TGP
is collecting in. The three options include:
     •    WHOT. Using the FLIR camera, hot objects appear lighter than a cooler background.
     •    BHOT. Using the FLIR camera, hot objects appear darker than a cooler background.
     •    TV. The Charge Coupled Device camera displays this image. This is a daytime, electro-optical camera.
Laser Spot Search Code. This is the laser PRF code the TGP will attempt to locate in LSS mode.
AIR-TO-GROUND (A-G) MODE
When A-G mode is first entered, the TGP will boresight at 150 mils below the zero sight line of the aircraft, directly
forward and slightly down. The following elements may be displayed.


     Field of View and Zoom Factor
         AGM-65 Handoff Sub-mode
                     Current Mode
         SPI Coordinates/Elevation
                         Grayscale

     Situational Awareness Cue


                      Gain Control


                       Crosshairs

                    FOV Indicators

                      Track Mode
                Slant Range to SPI
                       Laser Code




Field of View. Pressing this OSB toggles between Narrow Field of View (NFOV) or Wide Field of View (WFOV).
These views can vary between the CCD and FLIR sensors in the TGP.
     •      FLIR field of view:
                 o     Wide Field of View (WFOV) is 4° × 4°
                 o     Narrow Field of View (NFOV) is 1° × 1°
     •      CCD field of view:
                 o     Wide Field of View (WFOV) is 3.5° × 3.5°
                 o     Narrow Field of View (NFOV) is 1° by 1°
Zoom Factor. Within an FOV selection, you may additionally adjust the zoom-factor by zooming in and out with
the RANGE knob. The zoom range goes from 0Z (no zoom) to 9Z (highest level of zoom within FOV). Objects
within the TGP field of view double in size from 0 to 9 zoom.
AGM-65 Handoff Sub-mode. This OSB toggles between MAN and AUTO for AGM-65D/G Maverick hand off
mode.
     •      MAN. The AGM-65 will be slaved to the Line of Sight of the TGP but will not automatically be handed
            off the lock. Pilot must manually change SOI to AGM-65 and command lock manually.
     •      AUTO. TMS Right will hand off the lock to the AGM-65 if the target contrast and size meets criteria of
            missile lock.
Current Mode. This is the mode the TGP is currently in.
SPI Coordinates/Elevation. The lat/lon coordinates and elevation in feet of the current System-Point-of-
Interest (SPI) is displayed. This is usually the point in the center of the crosshairs at ground level.
Grayscale. When pressed, it displays a 10-stage gray scale bar at the bottom of the display. When enabled, the
label changes to GRAY ON.
Situational Awareness Cue. The SA cue provides you a reference to indicate the TGP’s current line of sight in
reference to the pod’s longitudinal (boresight) axis, which is coincidental with the aircraft longitudinal axis. The
cue is represented as a small square that can move to any spot within the display. The position of the SA square
represents the current TGP line of sight.
Gain Control. Pressing this OSB toggles between manual and automatic gain control for the FLIR video.
     •    MGC. If selected, level control arrows are displayed on the OSBs below (not shown). Gain may be
          controlled with the physical gain rocker switch on the top left of the MFD. The current selected gain is
          indicated on the top left corner of the TGP page (not shown).
     •    AGC. Gain is adjusted automatically, and the level control arrows and gain indicator are both removed.
Note: The AGC/MGC label and associated OSB labels are displayed even if the TGP is in TV mode.
Crosshairs. Line of sight for targeting and laser fire.
Field of View (FOV) Indicators. These four corner brackets are only shown when WIDE FOV is enabled and
indicate the portion of the image that will be displayed if NARO FOV is enabled.
Track Mode. If the TGP is in a track mode, this field will indicate the track mode it is in. Types include:
     •    AREA. In AREA track mode, the TGP performs image correlation to track an overall scene. AREA track
          mode is effective at tracking fixed objects.
     •    POINT. In POINT track mode, the TGP attempts to follow the centroid of a visible object using edge
          detection. POINT track mode is effective at tracking moving objects that are well-defined against their
          background, either because they are warmer (in HOC/COH sub-modes) or brighter (TV sub-mode).
     •    INR (inertial rates). In INR mode, the TGP maintains its LOS on a position using only inertial integration.
          It does not do any image processing. INR track mode is effective at approximately maintaining the TGP
          LOS when the target is at risk of being masked or obscured.
Slant Range to SPI. This indicates the slant range in nautical miles to the SPI. The preceding letter indicates
the source of the range data.
     •    L. Laser (priority over all other sources)
     •    T. TGP passive ranging
     •    (blank). Sensor that is not the TGP is providing range (for example, FCR A-G ranging)
Laser Code. If the laser is firing (flashing L), the targeting pod laser code being used should display the code as
set on the LASR DED page. This is an octal value of 1 to 8 with a range between 1111 and 2888.
                                                                                    Override Select

                                                                                    A-G Control Page Select

                                                                                    Radar Altitude

                                                                                    Sensor Type

                                                                                    North Arrow

                                                                                    Laser Spot Search Code

                                                                                    Track Polarity

                                                                                    Snowplow Mode

                                                                                    Meterstick
                                                                                    Cursor Zero
                                                                                    Sighting Option
                                                                                    Laser Status

                                                                                    Time to Go




OVRD Select. Pressing this OSB overrides any current mode and returns to STBY. The last selected mode is
returned to when OVRD is selected a second time.
A-G Control Page Select. Pressing this OSB selects the STBY Control Page.
Radar Altitude. The current radar altitude is displayed.
Sensor Type. Displayed in the upper right corner, this text field indicates the current video mode that the TGP
is collecting in. The three options include:
     •    WHOT. Using the FLIR camera, hot objects appear lighter than a cooler background.
     •    BHOT. Using the FLIR camera, hot objects appear darker than a cooler background.
     •    TV. The Charge Coupled Device camera displays this image. This is a daytime, electro-optical camera.
North Arrow. The north arrow cue consists of the letter N with an arrow, displayed on the top right corner of
the TGP base page. The arrow points to magnetic north in 1.4° increments relative to the TGP cross hairs line of
sight.
Laser Spot Search Code. This is the laser pulse rate frequency (PRF) code the TGP will attempt to locate in
laser spot search (LSS) mode.
Track Polarity. For either FLIR or TV, pressing this OSB toggles between Neutral Track (NT) and White Track
(WT). When TV is selected, the OSB cycles between NT, WT, and Black Track (BT).
     •    NT mode allows both white and black targets to be point tracked. This is the default A-G mode.
     •    WT only allows white point targets to be tracked. This is the default A-A mode
     •    BT allows black point targets to be tracked.
Pressing this OSB twice within 0.5 seconds toggles the Laser Spot Tracker (LST) function on and off.
Snowplow (SP). Enables Snowplow sighting mode. (See Snowplow Sighting Mode for more information.)
Meterstick. The meterstick is a number to the right of the reticle that indicates the length of the ground under
the crosshair, in meters.
Cursor Zero (CZ). Zeroizes cursor slews. (See Cursor Zero for more information.)
Sighting Option. Cycles the selected sighting point. (See Sighting Points and Cursor Corrections or more
information.)
Laser Status. This displays the current state of the laser designator.
     •    (blank). Laser not armed
     •    L. Laser armed.
     •    Flashing L. Laser firing.
Time to Go. This shows the time to the next event depending on the aircraft status. Time to reach the steerpoint
is displayed if in NAV master mode. Time to release weapon is displayed if in A-G mode if a target has been
designated in an auto-delivery mode. Time to impact is displayed if a weapon has been released.
Weapons delivery using the TGP in A-G mode is covered in the Laser Guided Bombs section.


Track Modes
The Litening II targeting pod can employ one of three different modes to track a target: AREA, POINT, INR
(inertial rates). Each track mode is suitable for a different situation.
     •    In AREA track mode, the TGP performs image correlation to track an overall scene. AREA track mode
          is effective at tracking fixed objects.
     •    In POINT track mode, the TGP attempts to follow the centroid of a visible object using edge detection.
          POINT track mode is effective at tracking moving objects that are well-defined against their
          background, either because they are warmer (in HOC/COH sub-modes) or brighter (TV sub-mode).
     •    In INR mode, the TGP maintains its LOS on a position using only inertial integration. It does not do
          any image processing. INR track mode is effective at approximately maintaining the TGP LOS when
          the target is at risk of being masked or obscured.
Therefore, it is recommended to use AREA track mode for stationary targets and POINT track mode for moving
targets. In situations where the targeting pod is likely to become masked (intensive maneuvering, concealment
behind terrain, or turning away from the target), it’s recommended to first change the TGP to INR track mode to
preserve the LOS as best as possible. SP mode is useful for locating targets directly ahead without reference to
steerpoints or other anchor points loaded into the aircraft.
When the targeting pod is initially brought out of standby, it is not in any track mode. The pilot can move the
targeting pod between track modes using the TMS switch:
                   INR MODE               AREA MODE               POINT MODE            SP MODE

 TMS               Commands POINT         Commands      POINT                           Commands
 FORWARD           track                  track                                         POINT track
 TMS RIGHT         Commands      AREA                             Commands     AREA     Commands
                   track                                          track                 AREA track
 TMS DOWN          Commands Cursor        Commands         INR    Commands       INR
                   Zero                   track                   track
Targeting pod in INR (inertial rates) track mode (crosshair is enlarged)




                  Targeting pod in AREA track mode
                             Targeting pod in POINT track mode (box encloses track target)

When the TGP cursor is slewed, the targeting pod automatically and temporarily changes to INR track mode. The
previous track mode (AREA or POINT) is re-commanded once slewing stops.
Laser Ranging
One very important feature of the Targeting Pod’s laser designator is the ability to measure the slant range to
the target. The laser is fired and the time it takes to receive the reflected laser energy is measured, providing a
precise range. This information is then fed to the Fire Control Computer to update the stored target elevation
and greatly improve the accuracy of the computed firing solution.
This can and should be done when possible for all weapons delivery types, not just laser guided bombs. To
facilitate this, the TGP automatically slaves to the pipper while in gun, rocket, and bomb CCIP modes, and to the
target designator while in CCRP and DTOS modes.
These weapons delivery modes are discussed fully in the Air-to-Ground Employment section.
To take a laser range, the Laser Arm Switch must be set to ARM. Laser firing is inhibited with the switch set to
OFF.




The Laser status is displayed as an L on the HUD and TGP display when the Laser Arm switch is set to arm.
The laser is fired by squeezing the trigger to the first detent. The L flashes when the laser designator is firing.
Releasing the trigger stops lasing.




                                                   Laser Status
AIR-TO-AIR (A-A) MODE
The TGP is automatically commanded to the radar line-of-sight when A-A master mode is selected, and the radar
is tracking a target. If the radar is not tracking an aerial target, the pod directs its line-of-sight straight ahead at
-3° elevation.
From the boresight, you may slew the TGP crosshair using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch. When slewing, the
TGP camera moves in a space stabilized manner. When in this slewed mode, but not tracking a target, “RATES”
is indicated on the display. After being slewed, the crosshairs will be reduced to half-size.
If the valid air target passes within the narrow field of view area (represented by the four corner markers), the
TGP will attempt to track the target and place a cross “+” on it. If the target flies outside the narrow field of view
area, the cross will disappear.
If you then command TMS Forward Short HOTAS command (command point track), the target will be centered
in the crosshair and a box will be drawn around the target to conform to its size. When in this mode, “POINT”
will be displayed as well as the tracking cross. To exit POINT track, the user may command INR track (TMS Right)
or return to slave mode (TMS Aft).
The following elements may be displayed.


                                                                                          Override Select

                                                                                          A-G Control Page Select
                Current Mode
                                                                                          Radar Altitude
                 Field of View and
                 Zoom Factor                                                              Sensor Type


     Situational Awareness Cue                                                            Laser Spot Search Code

                     Crosshairs


                  FOV Indicators                                                          Track Mode




Current Mode. This is the mode the TGP is currently in.
Field of View. Pressing this OSB toggles between Narrow Field of View (NFOV) or Wide Field of View (WFOV).
These views can vary between the CCD and FLIR sensors in the TGP.
     •     FLIR field of view:
                o     Wide Field of View (WFOV) is 4° × 4°
                o     Narrow Field of View (NFOV) is 1° × 1°
     •     CCD field of view:
                o     Wide Field of View (WFOV) is 3.5° × 3.5°
                o     Narrow Field of View (NFOV) is 1° × 1°
Zoom Factor. Within an FOV selection, you may additionally adjust the zoom-factor by zooming in and out with
the RANGE knob. The zoom range goes from 0Z (no zoom) to 9Z (highest level of zoom within FOV). Objects
within the TGP field of view double in size from 0 to 9 zoom.
Crosshairs. Line of sight for targeting and laser fire.
Field of View (FOV) Indicators. These four corner brackets are only shown when WIDE FOV is enabled and
indicate the portion of the image that will be displayed if NARO FOV is enabled.
OVRD Select. Pressing this OSB overrides any current mode and returns to STBY. The last selected mode is
returned to when OVRD is selected a second time.
A-G Control Page Select. Pressing this OSB selects the STBY Control Page.
Radar Altitude. The current radar altitude is displayed.
Sensor Type. Displayed in the upper right corner, this text field indicates the current video mode that the TGP
is collecting in. The three options include:
     •    WHOT. Using the FLIR camera, hot objects appear lighter than a cooler background.
     •    BHOT. Using the FLIR camera, hot objects appear darker than a cooler background.
     •    TV. The Charge Coupled Device camera displays this image. This is a daytime, electro-optical camera.
Laser Spot Search Code. This is the laser pulse rate frequency (PRF) code the TGP will attempt to locate in
laser spot search (LSS) mode.
Track Mode. If the TGP is in a track mode, this field will indicate the track mode it is in. Types include:
     •    RATES. When in A-A mode and the slew function is released, the TGP will automatically enter RATES
          mode (indicated in the tracking-type field).
     •    POINT. As with A-G mode, the user may command a Point track over an object. This mode is also used
          for radar locked targets.
Situational Awareness Cue. The SA cue provides you a reference to indicate the TGP’s current line of sight in
reference to the pod’s longitudinal (boresight) axis, which is coincidental with the aircraft longitudinal axis. The
cue is represented as a small square that can move to any spot within the display. The position of the SA square
represents the current TGP line of sight.
HOTAS COMMANDS
The following HOTAS commands are available when the TGP is sensor of interest (SOI).
TMS Forward. Enters AREA track when pressed, then POINT track when released. If POINT track fails, it remains
in AREA track.
TMS Aft. If TGP is tracking, break track and return to Slave mode (e.g., slaved to A-G SPI or A-A FCR line of
sight). If TGP is already in Slave mode, Cursor Zero.
TMS Left. Toggle FLIR polarity between white hot and black hot.
TMS Right (Maverick not selected). Enter AREA track mode.
TMS Right (Maverick selected). Attempt Maverick handoff.
Trigger (First Detent). Fire Laser.
Trigger (Second Detent). Fire laser for 30 seconds if in CCIP bombing mode. (See Laser Ranging section.)
Expand/FOV. Toggle FOV between Wide and Narrow.




                                             Trigger                       Target Management
                                                                           Switch (TMS)

                                         Expand/FOV




Manual Slew. The TGP view can be slewed to scan the scene and search for targets using the cursor controls.
Manual slew is available is either in Slave mode or in one of the tracking sub-modes (e.g., area track or point
track).




                                                                          Cursor/Enable Switch
HARM TARGETING SYSTEM
HARM TARGETING SYSTEM
HARM TARGETING SYSTEM
The AN/ASQ-213 HARM Targeting System (HTS pod) enables the F-16C to efficiently perform the Suppression of
Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD) mission. The HTS pod detects and classifies hostile radar emissions and then utilizes
signals triangulation to passively range and locate threat radar systems on the battlefield.




                        AN/ASQ-213 Detection, Classification, and Triangulation

The HTS pod is not required to employ the AGM-88 HARM missile, however it does enable the targeting of threat
radars more efficiently. Most notably, when equipped with an HTS pod, the pilot is not limited by the field-of-
view of the HARM missile seeker itself. Even radar systems that are to the side or even behind the aircraft can
be handed off to the AGM-88 for engagement.
Although originally designed to enhance the tactical employment of HARM anti-radiation missiles against air
defenses, the HTS pod can be used designate threat radars for the employment of other sensors or weapons.
The HTS also dramatically increases the pilot’s situational awareness of the threat radar environment in the
surrounding airspace and allows the pilot to make critical decisions regarding which threats must be avoided and
which threats must be engaged to accomplish the mission.


HARM Targeting System Activation
The HTS pod (if equipped) is powered through the left “chin”
hardpoint along the center fuselage, just aft of the engine intake.
This is accomplished by positioning the LEFT HDPT switch to the
forward position on the SNSR PWR control panel on the right
console.
The HTS pod will require approximately 30 seconds to initialize.
The HARM Targeting System cannot function without the MMC, ST STA, or MFD avionics systems, or without a
properly aligned INS.
Radio Direction Finding and Triangulation
Just as aeronautical navigational aids can be received by
specialized receivers onboard an aircraft to determine their
bearing relative to the receiver, other radio signals can be
received using specialized radio antennas. Using such                                                           North
antennas, an “angle-of-arrival” can be determined within a
margin of error that is predicated on the sophistication of the
equipment and the receiving antenna. This process of                   North
measuring angle-of-arrival is known as radio direction
finding.
If the same radio signal can be received and measured using
radio direction finding equipment at multiple locations, the
corresponding bearings can be used to triangulate the
                                                                                                               Position B
position of the radio emitter. This technique is known as
radio triangulation. Using such techniques, the location of
any emitter of electromagnetic signals can be determined
                                                                     Position A
using passive radio receivers.
                                                                           Radio triangulation from
As with other forms of radio signals, radar emissions can                    two known positions
likewise be received by an antenna that is specifically tuned
to process such radar signals. Many military aircraft possess radar warning receivers (RWR) that are not only able
to plot the relative azimuth of radar signals around the aircraft in 360 degrees but are also capable of warning
the aircrews of the type of threat and when the radar characteristics have changed in such a way that indicates
that the aircraft is under attack.
Like other angle-of-arrival measurements, the accuracy of these radar warning receivers is subject to the
sensitivity and sophistication of their radar receivers as well as the capabilities of the RWR display itself. Often
times, the azimuth resolution of an RWR is only necessary to the extent of warning the aircrew of the general
threat direction for the purposes of determining appropriate defensive actions or evasive maneuvers to be
performed.
                                                                  ALR-56M Azimuth Resolution
If radio direction finding devices onboard an
aircraft are designed to calculate precise
angle-of-arrival data in order to triangulate
the position of threat radar emitters, often
times such specialized devices will possess a
finer azimuth resolution for determining the                                      ASQ-213 Azimuth Resolution
angle-of-arrival of such signals compared to
an RWR.                                            Angle-of-arrival azimuth resolution of radar signals

The F-16C is equipped with an ALR-56M radar warning receiver in addition to the HARM Targeting System. Unlike
the ALR-56M, which is a defensive system intended to warn the pilot of an impending attack on the aircraft, the
HARM Targeting System is designed as an offensive system for passively locating enemy air defense radar sites.
As such, in the case of the F-16C, the HTS pod is more capable than the F-16’s own ALR-56M for determining
precise threat direction.
However, like the ALR-56M, the HARM Targeting System is subject to the same negative impacts to accuracy
that occur while the aircraft is performing aggressive maneuvers or is flying at extreme attitudes in pitch and roll.
Passive ranging and geo-location using Angle-of-Arrival (AoA)
The ASQ-213 HTS pod passively provides                                 2. 2nd scan referenced at Position B provides
ranging and position data of threat radars by                          a second bearing, outlining an approximate
calculating the angle-of-arrival (AoA) of                                 region within which the radar is located

detected radar signals over the course of
multiple scans. Using the known position of the                          3. Subsequent scans provide additional
                                                                        bearings and reference positions to refine
aircraft during each scan, the HTS triangulates
                                                                        the precise location of the detected radar
a threat radar’s location within an area of
probability called an “error ellipse”.
As the radar signal data is processed, the                                1. 1st scan referenced at Position A
                                                                          provides initial bearing to the radar
location and size of the error ellipse is
determined based on several angle-of-arrival
measurements; and is continuously updated
with subsequent measurements provided by
each scan in which the radar signal is received.
As the size of the error ellipse shrinks, the
accuracy of the calculated position of the
threat radar improves. The error ellipse will
rarely be re-calculated in a uniform manner
following each scan, with the computed major
and minor axes changing in size and                                                                                    Position C
orientation. This may sometimes lead to
intermittent “jumps” of the threat radar’s
computed position.
The accuracy, or position quality, of this
passive ranging is based on the relative offset
between each measured angle-of-arrival and                                                         Position B
the number of scans within which the same
radar signal was received. If the threat radar
is at a long distance or if the aircraft is flying
directly toward or away from it, the relative
difference between each subsequent angle-of-
arrival measurement will be very narrow and                                Position A
the error ellipse will be very large. Flying at
oblique angles relative to the radar’s angle-of-
arrival will improve the HTS pod’s ability to                Geo-location of radar emissions using AOA
reduce the size of the error ellipse.
                                          The size of the error ellipse is categorized by the HARM Targeting System
                Major axis orientation
                                          within five PGM classification levels, which represents the position quality of
                           Major Axis     the ranging data for employing precision guided munitions. These PGM
                                          levels are ranked PGM 1 through PGM 5, with PGM 5 being the least accurate
                           Minor Axis     with a large error ellipse, and PGM 1 being the most accurate with a small
                          Error Ellipse   error ellipse.
                                          When attempting to electro-optically acquire an air defense battery through
                                          the targeting pod, position quality data that is categorized as PGM 2 will
                                          typically generate a SPI location quite close to the radar’s true location. In
   Geo-location Error Ellipse             these instances, a brief search in the vicinity of the SPI is usually all that is
                                          required to spot the air defense battery. To achieve PGM 1 position quality,
                                          more precise measurements are required using time-difference-of-arrival
                                          (TDOA), as described on the following page.
Passive ranging and geo-location using Time-Difference-of-Arrival (TDOA)
In addition to angle-of-arrival calculations, the ASQ-213 HTS pod is capable of calculating the time-of-arrival of
a singular radar emitter and comparing the time-of-arrival measurement between other HTS pods across the
datalink (TNDL). This method of geo-location is known as time-difference-of-arrival, or TDOA, and requires a
minimum of three HTS-equipped F-16C’s working cooperatively to geo-locate the position of a single radar threat.
Although this method of geo-location is more limited in scope and requires multiple aircraft in the flight to calculate
the radar’s position, the calculations are more precise, and the geo-location process is accomplished more quickly.
When a radar symbol is designated on the HARM Attack Display (HAD), the pilot may initiate the TDOA process
on the designated radar, which will send TDOA instructions to the other F-16 Flight/Team members that have
been selected for TDOA operations. The other HTS pods will be “slaved” to the “master” HTS pod that initiated
the TDOA process and will begin communicating time-of-arrival data from the designated radar.


    Speed of light = 299,792,458 m/s

    Time difference between Sensor 1 and Sensor 2
    Δt 0.00001663 sec = Δd 4985.5 meters

    Time difference between Sensor 1 and Sensor 3
    Δt 0.00002112 sec = Δd 6331.6 meters                                                      4. The common intersection of
                                                                                                 each hyperbola is used to
    Time difference between Sensor 2 and Sensor 3                                             determine the precise location
    Δt 0.00003775 sec = Δd 11317.2 meters                                                         of the selected emitter




                                        1. Master sensor prompts
                                      remaining sensors to measure
      Sensor 2                      time-of-arrival of selected emitter




                                                                                                      Sensor 3


          3. Time difference (Δt) is
     converted to difference in distance                                                2. The reception times of the selected
                                                           Sensor 1                         emitter’s signals are compared
       (Δd) using hyperbolic functions
                                                                                          between each sensor via datalink



                                Δd = 4985.5 m                Δd = 11317.2 m   Δd = 6331.6 m

                                       Geo-location of radar emissions using TDOA

Each unique time-of-arrival is recorded and transmitted between the HTS pods. Since the time at which the radar
transmissions began are unknown, the differences between each time-of-arrival are converted to differences in
distance (Δd) by multiplying the time difference (Δt) by the speed of light. Once these calculations are performed,
hyperbolic functions are employed to plot these differences in distance between each TDOA sensor, based on the
known positions of each HTS-equipped F-16 contributing to the TDOA process. The location at which each
individual hyperbola intersects with the others is the geo-located position of the radar emitter.
HARM ATTACK DISPLAY (HAD)
The HAD MFD format displays a top-down, plan-view depiction of the threat radar environment around the aircraft
(ownship), with additional graphical representations of flight members, datalink information, steerpoints, and
routes. The HAD format is very similar to the Horizontal Situation Display (HSD) MFD format presentation, but
with some slight differences. Like the HSD, many of the symbology elements on the HAD format can be selectively
toggled on the HAD Control page, but are meant to provide the pilot situational awareness of threat radar
locations and emission status within the overall tactical environment.
Threat radar symbols are classified by radar type using alphanumeric codes and categorized by radar mode using
colors. A complete list of threat radar symbol types can be reviewed in Appendix C.
       •             Radar is emitting in Search mode.
       •             (Steady) Radar is emitting in Track mode.
       •             (Flashing) Radar is emitting in Launch mode.
       •             Radar emissions have not been detected for at least 2 minutes. If radar emissions are not detected
                     for over 4 minutes, the symbol will be removed from the HAD.
                        1. Centered/Depressed Format   2. Normal/Expand View   3. Threat Page   4. Control Page




                                                                                                          14. HARM WEZ
               5. Range Rings

     6. Range Scale Increase                                                                              15. HAD Cursor

               7. Range Scale                                                                             16. Selected Steerpoint

     8. Range Scale Decrease
                                                                                                          17. Active Navigation Route

     9. TDOA Team Selection                                                                               18. Friendly Declutter


                 10. Ownship
                                                                                                          19. Geo Specificity Selection
               11. Steerpoint

           12. Memory Target                                                                              20. Target Isolate Selection

  13. Azimuth Steering Line
                                                                                                          21. HARM Launch Profile




                                           HAD Base Page – Primary symbology

1.     Centered/Depressed Format. Toggles between Depressed (DEP) and Centered (CEN) HSD formats.
       When set to Depressed, the ownship is biased to the bottom portion of the HAD, allowing the HAD to
       primarily depict battlespace in front of the aircraft. When set to Centered, the ownship is displayed in the
       center of the HAD, depicting battlespace in all directions around the aircraft equally.
2.     Normal/Expand View. Cycles the HAD between NORM, EXP1 and EXP2 viewing modes. The Expand/FOV
       button on the Side Stick Controller (SSC) may also be pressed to cycle between these viewing modes when
       the HAD is selected as SOI. (See HAD Expand (EXP) Mode for more information.)
3.     Threat Page (THRT). Toggles the MFD between the HAD base page and the Threat page.
4.   Control Page (CNTL). Toggles the MFD between the HAD base page and the Control page.
5.   Range Rings. Depicts sub-ranges below the current range scale.
     When the HAD is set to Depressed format, the outer ring will correspond with the HAD range scale, with
     two additional inner rings set at ⅔ and ⅓ of the range scale.
     When the HAD is set to Centered format, the outer ring will correspond with the HAD range scale, with an
     inner ring set at ½ the range scale.
6.   Range Scale Increase. Increases the HAD range scale by one setting. When the HAD is set to its highest
     range scale, this option is removed from the HAD.
7.   Range Scale. Displays the range (in nautical miles) of the furthest HAD range ring. The minimum range
     that the HAD can be set to is 10 NM (Centered format) or 15 NM (Depressed format). The maximum range
     that the HAD can be set to is 160 NM (Centered format) or 240 NM (Depressed format).
8.   Range Scale Decrease. Decreases the HAD range scale by one setting. When the HAD is set to its lowest
     range scale, this option is removed from the HAD.
9.   TDOA Team Selection (TM). Determines the Flight/Team members from which TDOA messages will be
     accepted. When a TDOA message is received via TNDL, the ownship HTS pod will be slaved to the
     Flight/Team member’s HTS pod that has initiated a TDOA sequence against a radar emitter.
     •    TM (Team). TDOA messages will only be accepted from Flight/Team members that are designated as
          the TDOA sub-team. (See TNDL STN DED page for more information.)
     •    AL (All). TDOA messages will be accepted from all Flight/Team members regardless of whether they
          are designated as the TDOA sub-team.
     •    NO (None). TDOA messages will not be accepted from any Flight/Team members.
10. Ownship. Depicts the location of the ownship.
11. Steerpoint. Steerpoints that are not the selected steerpoint are displayed as hollow white circles.
12. Memory Target (MEM). Not implemented.
13. Azimuth Steering Line. Displays the relative alignment of the aircraft heading with the bearing to the
    current steerpoint, SPI, or weapon release solution. If the line is to the left or right of the watermark, the
    pilot must turn left or right respectively toward the vertical line to align the aircraft with the desired course
    or target. If the line bisects the center of the watermark, the aircraft is on course toward the selected
    steerpoint, SPI, or weapon release solution.
14. HARM WEZ (see image on the next page). Depicts the weapon engagement zone (WEZ) of the AGM-
    88 HARM missile, which is based on the selected POS mode HARM launch profile along with the ownship’s
    current attitude, altitude, and speed. If the aircraft is flying at high speeds, high altitudes, and/or in a climb,
    the depicted WEZ will dynamically grow in size to represent the improved kinematic performance of the
    AGM-88 when launched from those high speeds and altitudes. If the aircraft is operating at slower speeds,
    low altitudes, and/or in a dive, the WEZ will dynamically shrink to represent the negative impacts such
    launch conditions will have on the range and performance of the AGM-88.
     When handing off a threat radar to the HARM missile, the AGM-88 should only be launched at the selected
     target if the threat radar is within the depicted HARM WEZ outline. If the HARM WEZ extends beyond the
     current range scale of the HAD, the WEZ will be shown with a dashed outline.
         Equations Of Motion WEZ               Range Unknown WEZ                       Pre-Briefed WEZ




                 HARM WEZ in EOM (Left), RUK (Center), and PB (Right) launch profiles

     The POS mode launch profile can be changed on the WPN MFD format when the SMS weapon profile is set
     to AG88. (See AGM-88 HARM for more information.)
15. HAD Cursor. The HAD cursor is slewed using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch and can be used to view
    expanded information of a threat radar when placed over a radar symbol, or can be used to select the threat
    radar for handoff when TMS Forward is pressed while the cursor is placed over a radar symbol.
16. Selected Steerpoint. The steerpoint selected as the current navigation steerpoint is displayed as a solid
    white circle.
17. Active Navigation Route. The active navigation route is displayed as a solid white line linking sequential
    steerpoints 1-25.
18. Friendly Declutter. Controls the display of friendly aircraft PPLI symbols received over TNDL datalink.
    Each press will cycle through the three declutter levels.
     •    FR ON. All friendly aircraft PPLI symbols are displayed.
     •    FL ON. Only Flight member (1-4), Team member (5-8), and Donor PPLI symbols are displayed. All
          other friendly aircraft PPLI symbols are hidden.
     •    FR OFF. All friendly aircraft PPLI symbols are hidden.
19. Geo Specificity Selection (GEO). Not implemented.
20. Target Isolate Selection (TI). Not implemented.
21. HARM Launch Profile. Displays the currently selected launch profile for the AGM-88 POS sub-mode.
22. Error Ellipse Major Axis Orientation (see image on the next page). Displays the orientation (in
    degrees magnetic) of the major axis of the error ellipse for the threat radar under the HAD cursor.
23. Error Ellipse Major Axis Length (see image on the next page). Displays the length of the major axis
    of the error ellipse for the threat radar under the HAD cursor. Lengths are displayed in nautical miles (NM),
    unless the length is less than 6,000 feet, in which case the length will be displayed in feet.
24. Error Ellipse Minor Axis Length (see image on the next page). Displays the length of the minor axis
    of the error ellipse for the threat radar under the HAD cursor. Lengths are displayed in nautical miles (NM),
    unless the length is less than 6,000 feet, in which case the length will be displayed in feet.
25. PGM Level (see image on the next page). Displays the quality of the ranging data for employing
    precision guided munitions. PGM levels are ranked PGM 1 through PGM 5, with PGM 5 being the least
    accurate with a large error ellipse, and PGM 1 being the most accurate with a small error ellipse.
                            22. Error Ellipse Major   23. Error Ellipse   24. Error Ellipse
                               Axis Orientation       Major Axis Length   Minor Axis Length   25. PGM Level




26. Radar in Search Mode

      27. Bullseye Symbol

        28. Radar Offline


  29. Radar in Track Mode


         30. HAD Cursor                                                                                       32. Flight/Team Member PPLI
         Bearing & Range
                                                                                                               33. Friendly Air
        31. Bullseye LOS,                                                                                     Surveillance Track
        Bearing & Range
                                                                                                              34. Friendly Donor PPLI




                                           HAD Base Page – Tactical symbology

26. Radar in Search Mode. Depicts a threat radar that is actively emitting in Search mode.
27. Bullseye Symbol. Depicts the location of the Bullseye point. The Bullseye point is normally set to Steerpoint
    25 but can be set to a different steerpoint on the BULL DED page.
28. Radar Offline. Depicts a threat radar that has not been detected as actively emitting for at least 2 minutes.
    If the threat radar has not been detected as actively emitting after 4 minutes, this symbol will be removed
    from the HAD.
29. Radar in Track Mode. Depicts a threat radar that is actively emitting in Track mode. If the threat radar
    begins actively emitting in a distinct Launch mode, the symbol will flash.
30. HAD Cursor. If Bullseye is enabled on the BULL DED page, this data field will display the bearing and range
    from the Bullseye point to the HAD cursor.
31. Bullseye LOS, Bearing & Range. Displays a pointer symbol that indicates the relative direction (line-of-
    sight or LOS) to the Bullseye point from the nose of the ownship. Displays the ownship’s range (in nautical
    miles) and bearing (in degrees magnetic) from the Bullseye point, with the range displayed inside the pointer
    symbol and the bearing from Bullseye displayed below it.
32. Flight/Team Member PPLI. Friendly, TNDL participant aircraft that are set as a Flight member (1-4) or
    a Team member (5-8) of the ownship.
33. Friendly Air Surveillance Track. Friendly aircraft that have been detected by an AWACS aircraft and
    distributed across the TNDL network as air surveillance tracks.
34. Friendly Donor PPLI. Friendly, TNDL participant aircraft that are set as a Donor to the ownship.
HAD Threat (THRT) Page
The HARM Targeting System includes several threat “classes” with specific radar types grouped within each class.
Enabling or disabling specific threat classes from the HAD Threat page allows the pilot to optimize the HTS scan
intervals for more efficient detection and geo-location of the types of threat radars that are anticipated to be
encountered during the mission.
Each HAD threat class is pre-programmed into the HARM Targeting System and cannot be configured from the
cockpit. However, the HTS can be configured to utilize a Manual threat class, which can be edited from the HTS
DED page at any point during the mission.
A complete list of each threat class can be reviewed in Appendix C.
                           1. Threat Class 11   2. Manual Class   3. Site Selection   4. All Threat Classes




                                                                                                              5. Scan Cycle Time




              6. Threat                                                                                        7. Threat
             Classes 1-5                                                                                      Classes 6-10




1.   Threat Class 11. When highlighted, threat radars within threat class 11 are added to each HTS scan cycle.
2.   Manual Class (MAN). When highlighted, threat radars within the Manual threat class are added to each
     HTS scan cycle. This option is only displayed on the HAD Threat page when threat radars have been added
     to the Manual threat class on the HTS DED page.
3.   Site Selection (SITE). Not implemented.
4.   All Threat Classes (ALL). Highlights/de-highlights all threat classes simultaneously. If some threat classes
     are highlighted while others are not, the first press of this button will highlight all threat classes. Each
     subsequent press will highlight/de-highlight all threat classes at once. If MAN is displayed at OSB 2, each
     subsequent press of ALL at OSB 5 will alternate between enabling classes 1-11 and just the Manual threat
     class.
5.   Scan Cycle Time (SCT). Displays the time the HTS requires to perform one complete scan cycle and
     refresh the HAD with the estimated locations and emission status of each detected threat radar. The scan
     cycle time is dependent on the number of threat radar types the HTS must scan for. Highlighting only the
     required threat classes needed to perform the mission will increase the efficiency of the HARM Targeting
     system and reduce the time required to accurately determine the location of detected threat radar systems.
6.   Threat Classes 1-5. When highlighted, threat radars within the threat classes next to their respective OSB
     are added to each HTS scan cycle. These threat classes include ground and naval air defense systems of
     Russian or Chinese design.
7.   Threat Classes 6-10. When highlighted, threat radars within the threat classes next to their respective
     OSB are added to each HTS scan cycle. These threat classes include ground and naval air defense systems
     of American or western European design.


HTS DED Page
The HARM Targeting System DED page is accessed by pressing ENTR on the ICP keypad when the MISC DED
page is displayed on the DED. This page is used to configure a Manual threat class for use on the HARM Attack
Display (HAD) MFD format. The Manual threat class can be utilized to better tailor the HTS scan cycles to the
radar signals that are anticipated to be encountered during the mission.
The HTS DED page will only be displayed on the MISC page list when an HTS pod is installed on the aircraft and
powered using the SNSR PWR control panel.


                                                                                                3. Selected Steerpoint
             1. Threat Number


           2. Threat ALIC Code                                                                  4. DED Asterisks




                                                                                          Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                            Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field


                                    Reject
                                                                            Return DED
                                    Accept                                                                          No function
                                                                            to CNI page




                          Operate            Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                          to the next data field


1.   Threat Number. Up to eight radar types may be added to the HAD Manual threat Class.

2.   Threat ALIC Code. Displays the ALIC code representing a specific radar type that is loaded into the
     corresponding threat entry. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over the data field, inputting an
     ALIC code using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. An empty ALIC code slot will be displayed by four X
     characters.
3.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
4.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that
     has been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP
     ENTR button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
HAD Control (CNTL) Page
The HAD Control page is used to configure individual HAD graphic elements and symbology to suit the tactical
situation or individual preferences of the pilot, or to configure specific functions of the HTS pod itself. The first
page displays options regarding HAD symbols, navigation routes, and geographic lines loaded from the DTC. The
second page displays additional options and functions of the AN/ASQ-213 HARM Targeting System.
                              1. Pre-planned Threats   2. Tertiary Table
                                     function




      3. Navigation Route 1                                                                  7. Geographic Line 1



      4. Navigation Route 2                                                                  8. Geographic Line 2



      5. Navigation Route 3                                                                  9. Geographic Line 3



     6. SAM Threat Radars                                                                    10. Geographic Line 4



                                                                                             11. Page Sequence




                                                HAD Control Page – Page 1

1.   Pre-planned Threats (PRE). Toggles the display of pre-planned air defense threats loaded from the DTC.
     (N/I)
2.   Tertiary Table (TER). Not implemented.
3.   Navigation Route 1 (NAV1). Toggles the display of the navigation route 1 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
4.   Navigation Route 2 (NAV2). Toggles the display of the navigation route 2 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
5.   Navigation Route 3 (NAV3). Toggles the display of the navigation route 3 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
6.   SAM Threat Radars (SAM). Toggles display of HTS-detected threat radar symbols.
7.   Geographic Line 1 (LINE1). Toggles the display of geographic line/shape 1 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
8.   Geographic Line 2 (LINE2). Toggles the display of geographic line/shape 2 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
9.   Geographic Line 3 (LINE3). Toggles the display of geographic line/shape 3 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
10. Geographic Line 4 (LINE4). Toggles the display of geographic line/shape 4 loaded from the DTC. (N/I)
11. Page Sequence. Cycles the MFD to Page 2 of the HAD Control page.
                                12. Data Recorder   13. Data Recording Rate   14. RPD Mode




       15. Geo-Pack Selection                                                                18. DTC Download
             Selection


                                                                                             19. AA Mode




    16. Data Recorder Zeroize



              17. GPS Zeroize                                                                20. Page Sequence




                                                    HSD Control Page – Page 2

12. Data Recorder (REC). Not implemented.
13. Data Recording Rate (DATA). Not implemented.
14. RPD Mode (RPD). Not implemented.
15. Geo-Pack Selection (GP). Not implemented.
16. Data Recorder Zeroize (REC ZERO). Not implemented.
17. GPS Zeroize (GPS ZERO). Not implemented.
18. DTC Download (DNLD). Not implemented.
19. AA Mode (AA). Not implemented.
20. Page Sequence. Cycles the MFD to Page 1 of the HAD Control page.
HAD Expand (EXP) Mode
If the HAD is SOI, HAD Expand mode be entered by pressing
the Expand/FOV button on the Side Stick Controller (SSC) or
by pressing OSB 3 on the HAD MFD format. Each press will
cycle between NORM, EXP1, and EXP2 viewing modes. When
EXP1 is entered, the HAD will switch to a 2:1 zoom ratio. When   HAD Cursor
EXP2 is entered, the HAD will switch to a 4:1 zoom ratio.
When Expand mode is entered, the HAD will be centered
around the location at which the HAD cursor was placed when
Expand mode was selected. Additionally, the following options
are removed from the HAD:
     •    Centered/Depressed format option at OSB 1.
     •    Range Scale Increase/Decrease options at OSB 19
          and OSB 20.
     •    Range Scale.
     •    Range Rings.
     •    Cardinal Directions.
Expand mode may be exited by performing any of the following
actions:
     •    The Expand/FOV button on the SSC is pressed to
          cycle back to NORM.
     •    OSB 3 on the HAD MFD format is pressed to cycle
          back to NORM.
     •    The SOI is assigned to another MFD format or the
          HUD.
HAD TARGET DESIGNATION
Threat radars may be designated on the HARM Attack Display, which will assign the SPI to the calculated 3-
dimensional location and hand off the threat radar to AGM-88 HARM missiles for engagement. This can be
performed by setting the HAD as SOI using DMS Aft-Short on the Side Stick Controller (SSC), placing the HAD
cursor over the threat radar symbol using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch, and using TMS Forward on the SSC
to designate the threat radar symbol as the target. Pressing TMS Aft on the SSC will reject the currently designated
threat radar as a target but will not reset the SPI back to the selected steerpoint.
When a threat radar is designated on the HAD, a handoff will be attempted to the LAU-118 station selected for
launch. The threat radar symbol will be highlighted to identify its status as the designated target and whether a
successful handoff to the AGM-88 missile was successful.
     •            Radar is designated but no handoff was completed.
     •            Radar is designated and handed off to the selected AGM-88 missile.
If AGM-88 missiles are loaded and have been powered on, the threat radar will be handed off to the LAU-118
station selected for launch, regardless of the master mode or SMS weapon profile. If the master mode is
subsequently switched to A-G and the SMS weapon profile is set as AG88, the AGM-88 can be fired at the
designated radar immediately. If a radar has been designated prior to powering the AGM-88 missiles, the radar
designation will need to be rejected and then re-designated to hand off the radar to the AGM-88 missile after it
has been powered on.




                                                                                        Radar designated
                                 Radar designated
                                                                                         and handed off




                                                                AGM-88 time to impact



                                                                                   AGM-88 time of impact



                                            HAD Target Designation

When a threat radar has been handed off to an AGM-88 missile and is within the HARM Weapon Engagement
Zone (WEZ), the time to impact (based on estimated HARM time of flight) and time of impact will be displayed
in the bottom right corner of the HAD above the HARM launch profile. This information is identical to the pre-
launch data displayed on the WPN MFD format when set to POS mode and the HARM launch profile is set to EOM
or PB. These can be referenced to coordinate and maximize the effect of multiple HARM missiles when employed
against heavily defended targets.
Once a threat radar has been designated, regardless of the selected SMS weapon profile, the SPI will be placed
at the calculated location of the designated radar. Other onboard sensors such as the FCR and TGP will accordingly
be cued to the new SPI location, allowing the pilot to engage the radar or associated air defenses with other
weapons if necessary, or store a markpoint at the location. Specifically in the case of the TGP, this will also allow
the pilot to visually confirm the accuracy of the calculated radar location. However, depending on the tactical
situation and the nature of the air defenses, this may not always be possible.
If a threat radar is designated, pressing TMS Right on the Side Stick Controller (SSC) will step to the next threat
radar detected by the HTS pod and designate that location for the SPI and handoff the newly designated radar
to the AGM-88 missile.
Air defense radar locations passively ranged by the HTS cannot be stored into steerpoint locations directly from
the HAD. However, by cueing other onboard sensors to these locations and performing accurate targeting, air
defenses may be plotted with greater precision compared to passive ranging of radar signals alone. Accurate
targeting may be accomplished using air-to-ground or air-to-surface radar scans at long range, electro-optical
TGP reconnaissance at medium range, or visual “out the window” identification at short-range using the HMCS.
Once air defense locations are confirmed with other sensors or by visual identification, markpoints can be
designated using the MARK DED page, or coordinates can be directly entered into the ICP using the STPT or
DEST DED pages from coordinate data displayed on the TGP or FCR MFD formats. Even if air defenses cannot be
confirmed by radar, electro-optical, or visual means, the SEAD DED page may be used to manually write down
coordinates for future input, reporting, and targeting.


HUD Designation & Launch Symbology
If the master mode is set to Air-to-Ground (A-G) and the SMS weapon profile is set to AG88, the HUD Master
Mode status will display “HARM” to indicate the aircraft’s targeting system is operating in HARM designation sub-
mode. The HUD will display the Steerpoint Diamond and associated steerpoint information, and the HARM FOV
Box will be derived from the HARM mode set on the WPN MFD format.


                                                              Azimuth Steering Line

                                                                                               HARM Launch Scale


    Steerpoint Diamond                                               TD Box


     HAS FOV Box                             Slant Range to    POS FOV Box                         Slant Range to
                                               Steerpoint                                         HAD designation




                                              Time To Go                                             Time to MMZ

       HARM designation       Distance to Steerpoint/            HTS designation        Bearing & Range to
          sub-mode              Steerpoint Number                  sub-mode              HAD designation


                    HUD Symbology pre-designation (left) & post-designation (right)

When a threat radar is designated on the HAD, the HUD Master Mode status will display “HTS” to indicate the
HARM Targeting System is being used for weapons designation in lieu of the seeker of the AGM-88 missile itself.
The steerpoint information will be replaced by the slant range to the HAD designation, time to the Missile
Maneuvering Zone (MMZ), bearing and range to the HAD designation, and the TD Box will be placed at the
location of the HAD designation. If set to HARM-As-Seeker (HAS) mode on the WPN MFD format, the AGM-88
will switch to POS mode and use the selected POS launch profile after handoff is complete, which will update the
size of the HARM FOV box and display the associated AGM-88 HUD symbology. (See AGM-88 HARM for more
information.)
Sighting Point Designation
Any time a threat radar is designated on the HAD MFD format, the current sighting point will be moved to the
calculated location of the designated radar. If the location of the designated radar is re-calculated by the HTS,
the current sighting point will be moved to the updated location. If the HAD designation is rejected, the sighting
point can be reset back to the selected steerpoint by selecting Cursor Zero (OSB 10 on the HSD MFD format, OSB
9 on the FCR or TGP MFD formats, or TMS Aft on the SSC when TGP is set as SOI).


          HAD designation                                         HAD designation




                                Actual steerpoint location


                                                                                        Actual steerpoint location



    Slant Range to Steerpoint

                                   Distance to Steerpoint/                                    Bearing & Range to
                                     Steerpoint Number                                         HAD designation


                      HAD designation in NAV mode (left) & HTS A-G sub-mode (right)

Depending on the master mode or sub-mode, either the STP sighting option (depicted by the steerpoint diamond),
or the TGT sighting option (depicted by the TD Box), will be set to the HAD designation. The sighting point may
be subsequently slewed using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch if a SOI other than HAD is selected that permits
cursor slew in the current master mode/sub-mode. However, if HAD is selected as SOI while a HAD designation
exists, the current sighting point will again be set to the calculated location of the designated threat radar.
If Cursor Zero is commanded while the SOI is set to HUD, FCR, or TGP, the current sighting point will be set to
the selected steerpoint, not the HAD designation. However, if HAD is selected as SOI, the sighting point will again
be set to the calculated location of the designated radar.
In the specific case of A-G master mode and in HARM designation sub-mode, when a threat radar is initially
designated, the STP sighting point will be set to the HAD designation. When the handoff to the AGM-88 missile
is complete, the sighting option will automatically change to TGT, which will also be set to the HAD designation.
The TGT sighting point can be subsequently slewed using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch if a SOI other than
HAD is selected.
When acquiring an air defense battery or vehicle using the TGP following a HAD designation of a threat radar,
slewing the sighting point can be useful in updating the HUD/HMCS symbology to the true location of the hostile
air defenses for a visual or electro-optical engagement using cluster munitions or AGM-65 missiles. However, to
avoid inadvertently returning the sighting point and its associated symbology back to the HAD designation (which
may not be accurate to the true location of the hostile air defenses), it may be wise to reject the HAD designation
prior to switching to a different SOI.
SEAD DED Page
If a threat radar has been designated on the
HARM Attack Display and the HAD is SOI, the
coordinates for the designated radar can be
displayed by accessing the SEAD DED page.
The SEAD DED page can only be accessed
under these conditions and is displayed using
TMS Left on the Side Stick Controller (SSC).
The Latitude, Longitude, Elevation and Time
Over Target (TOT) of the ownship are
displayed, based on the calculated position of
the radar system.
Due to the nature of the HARM Targeting
System’s passive ranging capability, the
accuracy of these coordinates is dependent on
the position quality of the ranging data for that
specific radar emitter. The size of the error
ellipse and corresponding PGM level should be
taken into consideration when using these
coordinates for targeting purposes.
The SEAD page will always reflect the
calculated coordinates of the designated
threat radar on the HAD MFD format. If TMS
Right is used to step to a different threat radar
designation on the HAD, the SEAD page will
update to reflect the location for the currently
designated threat radar.
TMS Aft will return the DED to the CNI page
and reject the currently designated threat
radar as a target, but it will not reset the SPI
back to the selected steerpoint.
HANDS-ON CONTROLS
The Target Management Switch (TMS) and
Expand/FOV button on the Side Stick Controller
(SSC), along with the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch                       Display Management
on the throttle grip, are the pilot’s controls for                      Switch (4-way)
interacting with the HARM Attack Display (HAD) and
                                                                       Target Management
designating threat radars for targeting by the                           Switch (4-way)
aircraft’s sensors or engagement by AGM-88 HARM
anti-radar missiles.                                                   Expand/FOV Button

NOTE: These commands are only active when the
Display Management Switch (DMS) is used to set
the HAD MFD format as the Sensor-Of-Interest
(SOI). (See the Tactical Employment chapter for
more information.)


                                                                                        RDR CURSOR/ENABLE Switch
                                                                                         (Multi-directional, Depress)

Throttle    Grip  Commands.     The    RDR                Side Stick Controller (SSC) Commands. The
CURSOR/ENABLE switch is multi-directional,                Target Management Switch (TMS) commands are
allowing the HAD cursor to be moved in any                contextual, based on whether a threat radar has
direction.                                                been designated as a target on the HAD MFD
                                                          format.

                                                                                    Designate Target


                                                                 Display SEAD
                                                                 DED page1
                                                                                                         Target Step1
                                                                 Initiate TDOA
                                                                 Sequence
                        Slew HAD cursor
                                                                                 Reject Target
                                                                                 Display CNI DED page2




     Short press (<0.5 sec)
                                                                         Cycle NORM/EXP1/EXP2 HAD modes
     Long press (>0.5 sec)

     Continuous press


1.   TMS Left and TMS Right commands are only available when a radar emitter is designated on the HAD MFD
     format.
2.   TMS Aft will only return the DED to the CNI page from the SEAD DED page.
JOINT HELMET-MOUNTED
 JOINT HELMET-MOUNTED
CUEING  SYSTEM
     CUEING SYSTEM
HELMET MOUNTED CUEING SYSTEM
The Joint Helmet Mounted Cuing System (JHMCS) features a Helmet Display Unit (HDU) that can be attached to
the pilot’s flight helmet, which projects aircraft, sensor, and weapon information directly onto the helmet visor,
without needing to look forward through the HUD or down inside the cockpit. The JHMCS system, which is
installed on various military aircraft, is simply referred to as the Helmet Mounted Cueing System (HMCS) in the
F-16C avionics.
The HMCS also allows sensors and weapons to be slaved, or “cued”, to the pilot’s helmet line-of-sight, up to 80°
off-boresight. This is a particularly effective system when paired with the AIM-9X missile, which contains a high-
angle off-boresight (HOB) seeker that is capable of tracking targets that are significantly outside of the HUD field-
of-view. This capability can be quite lethal during air-to-air engagements that occur within visual range (WVR).




                                                 Helmet Display Unit   Magnetic Receiver Unit




     High-angle Off-Boresight
          Missile Seeker
                                                                                                Magnetic Transmitter Unit




                                Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System (JHMCS)

The JHMCS visor itself contains a Magnetic Receiver Unit (MRU), which detects magnetic signals emitted by the
Magnetic Transmitter Unit (MTU) to relay helmet position and orientation to the aircraft electronics. These signals
are used by the aircraft electronics to steer sensors and weapons when commanded, and to determine the
appropriate virtual symbology to augment the pilot’s vision in order to increase situational awareness.
In realty, JHMCS symbology is projected onto the helmet visor in front of the right eye only. However, for some
DCS players, this may cause discomfort in VR. DCS: F-16C Viper allows players to selectively project the JHMCS
symbology onto either eye or both eyes, depending on player preference. This option may be set on the SPECIAL
Tab within the DCS: World Options.
HMCS Symbology
The HMCS is enabled using the SYMBOLOGY INT knob on the HMCS
control panel. Rotating the knob clockwise increases the brightness
intensity of the symbology and rotating it to the OFF position removes
the HMCS symbology from the visor and disables the system.


Some elements of the HMCS symbology are always present, others will be displayed or removed based on the
selected master mode, available sensor(s), or weapon profile; and some elements can be optionally displayed or
removed based on pilot preference. (See HMCS DED Settings for more information.)

        1. RWR Threat Direction

         2. RWR Priority Threat                                                           9. Aiming Cross

                   3. Current G

                                                                                          10. Altitude
                     4. Velocity

           5. Master Arm Status
                                                                                          11. Slant Range
         6. Master Mode Status
                                                                                          12. Distance to Steerpoint/
         7. Ownship Bearing &                                                                 Steerpoint Number
         Distance from Bullseye
                                                                                         13. Helmet Heading Scale
         8. Steerpoint Diamond




1.   RWR Threat Direction. Displays the relative azimuth of the priority threat detected by the RWR, indicated
     by a diamond. If the diamond is located at the top of the circle, the priority threat is directly in front of the
     aircraft. If the diamond is located at the bottom of the circle, the priority threat is directly behind the aircraft.
     If no priority threat is present, this symbology element will blank.
     A gap in the circle indicates the azimuth of the HMCS line-of-sight (LOS) to cue the pilot to the priority threat
     direction. If the threat direction diamond is centered within the gap, the HMCS LOS is aligned with the
     priority threat direction (in azimuth only), aiding the pilot in visually acquiring the threat aircraft, air defense
     system, or weapon’s signature.
     NOTE: The directional accuracy of this symbology is subject to the same limitations as the ALR-56M Threat
     Warning Azimuth Display.
2.   RWR Priority Threat. Displays the priority threat detected by the RWR. If no priority threat is present,
     this symbology element will blank.
3.   Current G. Displays the current aircraft G-load value. The G value is displayed to the nearest tenth of a G,
     and ranges from +9.9 to -9.9 G’s.
4.   Velocity. Velocity is displayed in knots, between 60 to 900 knots CAS. When below 60 knots CAS, the HMCS
     will display 48 knots.
     The Velocity may be set to calibrated airspeed (CAS), true airspeed (TAS), or ground speed (GND SPD)
     using the Velocity Switch on the HUD Control Panel. The Velocity will automatically revert to calibrated
     airspeed if in Dogfight mode or if the landing gear is deployed.
5.   Master Arm Status. Displays the position of the MASTER ARM Switch on the MISC panel.
     •    ARM. The MASTER ARM Switch is in the MASTER ARM position.
     •    (Blank). No text is displayed if the MASTER ARM Switch is in the OFF position.
     •    SIM. The MASTER ARM Switch is in the SIMULATE position.
6.   Master Mode Status. Displays the current master mode or sub-mode.
     •    NAV. Navigation master mode.                          •     CCIP. Continuously Computed Impact Point
                                                                      weapon delivery sub-mode while in A-G
     •    AAM. Air-to-Air Missile master mode with no                 master mode.
          missile type selected.
                                                                •     CCRP. Continuously Computed Release Point
     •    MSL. Missile Override master mode with no                   weapon delivery sub-mode while in A-G
          missile type selected.                                      master mode.
     •    DGFT. Dogfight master mode.                           •     DTOS. Dive/Toss weapon delivery sub-mode
     •    MRM. Medium Range Missile type selected                     while in A-G master mode.
          (AIM-120B/C) while in AAM or MSL master               •     LADD. Low Altitude Drogue Delivery weapon
          modes.                                                      delivery sub-mode while in A-G master mode.
     •    SRM. Short Range Missile type selected                •     MAN. Manual weapon delivery sub-mode for
          (AIM-9L/M/P/P3/P5) while in AAM or MSL                      manual bomb delivery while in A-G master
          master modes.                                               mode.
     •    HOB. High-Angle Off-Boresight missile type            •     VIS. Visual weapon delivery sub-mode for
          selected (AIM-9X) while in AAM or MSL                       employing AGM-65 (EO-VIS) or JDAM (VIS)
          master modes.                                               while in A-G master mode; or when the HUD
     •    EEGS. Enhanced Envelope Gun Sight for                       Mark Cue is active.
          employing the 20mm M61 rotary cannon                  •     PRE. Pre-planned weapon delivery sub-mode
          while in AAM or MSL master modes.                           for employing AGM-65 (EO-PRE) or JDAM
     •    JETT. Selective Jettison       or   Emergency               (PRE) while in A-G master mode.
          Jettison master modes.                                •     BORE. Boresight weapon delivery sub-mode
     •    HARM. HARM Missile designation sub-mode                     for employing AGM-65 while in A-G master
          while in A-G master mode.                                   mode.

     •    HTS. HARM Targeting System designation                •     STRF. Strafe weapon delivery sub-mode for
          sub-mode while in A-G master mode.                          employing the 20mm M61 rotary cannon
                                                                      while in A-G master mode.
7.   Ownship Bearing & Distance from Bullseye. Displays the azimuth and distance as measured from the
     Bullseye location to the aircraft.
     The Ownship Bearing & Distance from Bullseye can be toggled using the BULL DED page.
8.   Diamond Symbol. Displays the 3-dimensional position of the selected steerpoint, in both position and
     altitude. When the Diamond Symbol is out of the HMCS field-of-view (FOV) an X is superimposed across the
     symbol. (See Steerpoint Navigation for more information.)
9.   Aiming Cross. Displays the HMCS line-of-sight (LOS) for sensor cueing and target designation. If in Air-to-
     Air, Dogfight, or Missile Override master modes, the Aiming Cross becomes dynamic to aid the pilot in
     designating a target during high look-up angles and/or high-G conditions.
     If the pilot aims the HMCS LOS greater than 30° above the horizontal plane, relative to the aircraft’s fuselage,
     the Aiming Cross will be increasingly re-positioned higher in within the vertical plane of the HMCS FOV. The
     Aiming Cross will reach its maximum vertical deflection at an 80° look-up angle.
10. Altitude. The Altitude is in feet, to the nearest 10 feet.
11. Slant Range. The Slant Range is the direct, straight-line distance from the aircraft to the current target or
    SPI location. For range values greater than 1.0 NM, the range is displayed as a four-digit value to the nearest
    tenth of a nautical mile (i.e., 15.2 NM is displayed as “015.2”). For range values less than 1.0 NM, the range
    value is displayed as a three-digit value to the nearest hundred feet (i.e., 5500 feet is displayed as “055”).
    The letter on the left of the display indicates the method the range is determined.
     •    B. The slant range is determined based on the barometric altitude and steerpoint elevation.
     •    R. The slant range is determined based on the radar altimeter.
     •    F. The slant range is determined based on ranging data from the FCR.
     •    M. A Manual range is being used in an air-to-air mode or in air-to-ground CCIP mode.
12. Distance to Steerpoint/Steerpoint Number. The distance to the selected steerpoint is displayed to the
    left of the chevron in 1 nautical mile increments. The selected steerpoint number is displayed to the right of
    the chevron. (See Steerpoint Navigation for more information.)
13. Helmet Heading Scale. The Helmet Heading Scale indicates the magnetic heading of the HMCS line-of-
    sight (LOS). A fixed lubber line along the top of the scale and a digital readout below the scale displays the
    HMCS LOS. Each major tick mark on the tape represents 10° of magnetic heading and is accompanied by a
    2-digit label, and each minor tick mark represents 5° of magnetic heading.
Additional HMCS symbology elements associated with the various sensors and weapons are described in the
applicable chapters of this manual.


HMCS DED Settings
The HMCS symbology is designed to work in
conjunction with the existing cockpit structure
and Heads-Up Display (HUD). As such, the                HUD Blanking Area
avionics is configured to removed (or “blank”)
the HMCS display when the pilot’s helmet line-
of-sight (LOS) is detected to be within                                                     Cockpit Blanking Area
specifically configured blanking areas.
The F-16C has two blanking areas, one for the
HUD and the other for the cockpit itself, with
some overlap. If HMCS is enabled, whenever
the pilot’s helmet LOS is detected to be outside
of these boundaries, the HMCS symbology will
appear within the pilot’s visor. However, each
of these blanking areas can be individually                           HMCS Blanking Areas
toggled off, should the pilot choose to do so.
The HMCS must be aligned prior to takeoff. This ensures that sensors and weapons are precisely cued to the
HMCS Aiming Cross and virtual symbology elements are accurately placed within the pilot’s field-of-view. If the
mission begins with the aircraft already operating (engine running and systems initialized), the HMCS alignment
is completed for you. However, if performing a start sequence yourself (i.e. “cold start”), the HMCS alignment
will need to be completed to ensure precise cueing and display during your mission.
HMCS DISPLAY DED Page
The Helmet Mounted Cueing System DED page is accessed by pressing RCL on the ICP keypad when the MISC
DED page is displayed on the DED. This page is used to configure the HMCS display settings and perform an
alignment to ensure the helmet LOS measurements are calibrated to the individual pilot.
The first HMCS DED page is the HMCS Display page, which allows the pilot to tailor the display elements to
individual preferences and toggle the HMCS blanking areas, if desired.


              1. HUD Blanking                                                                 5. Selected Steerpoint

            2. Cockpit Blanking
                                                                                              6. DED Asterisks

             3. Declutter Level

               4. RWR Display



                                                                                      Move DED asterisks to
          Operate                         Cycle to next steerpoint                    the previous data field




                                                                        Return DED                                *Cycle DED to
                                                                        to CNI page                              HMCS ALIGN page

                              Enable

                         Operate         Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                      to the next data field


* HMCS ALIGN page is only accessible when the master mode is set to NAV.
1.   HUD Blanking. Displayed in highlighted text when enabled using the 0/M-SEL button. When enabled, the
     HMCS will blank when the helmet LOS is within the boundaries of the HUD blanking area.
2.   Cockpit Blanking. Displayed in highlighted text when enabled using the 0/M-SEL button. When enabled,
     the HMCS will blank when the helmet LOS is within the boundaries of the cockpit blanking area.
3.   Declutter Level. Displays the HMCS declutter level. May be changed by placing the DED asterisks around
     the data field and pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9 to cycle between LVL1, LVL2, and LVL3.
     •    LVL1. All symbology elements are displayed.
     •    LVL2. Altitude, Distance to Steerpoint/Steerpoint Number, and Helmet Heading Scale are removed.
     •    LVL3. Current G, Velocity, and Master Arm Status are removed, in addition to LVL2 removed elements.
4.   RWR Display. Enables/Disables the display of the RWR priority threat and direction. May be changed by
     placing the DED asterisks around the data field and pressing the 0/M-SEL button to toggle between ON and
     OFF.
5.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that
     has been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP
     ENTR button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
HMCS ALIGN DED Page
The second HMCS DED page is the HMCS Align page, which allows the pilot to ensure the HMCS is calibrated to
the correct helmet position for accurate LOS cueing and to ensure virtual symbology elements are displayed at
their correct positions within the pilot’s vision.


                    1. Coarse Align                                                          4. Selected Steerpoint

         2. Azimuth/Elevation Align
                                                                                            5. DED Asterisks

                       3. Roll Align




                                           Cycle to next steerpoint                   No function




                                                                        Return DED                         Cycle DED to
                                                                        to CNI page                      HMCS DISPLAY page

                              Enable

                        Operate          Cycle to previous steerpoint                 No function



1.   Coarse Alignment. Initiates a coarse alignment of the HMCS. To initiate the alignment sequence, set the
     SYMBOLOGY INT knob on the HMCS control panel to any position other than OFF and press the 0/M-SEL
     button.
2.   Azimuth/Elevation Alignment. Initiates a fine alignment of the HMCS in the azimuth and elevation axes.
     To initiate the alignment sequence, complete a COARSE alignment, and then press the 0/M-SEL button when
     the DED asterisks sequence to the AZ/EL data field.
3.   Roll Alignment. Initiates a fine alignment of the HMCS in the roll axis. To initiate the alignment sequence,
     complete an AZ/EL alignment, and then press the 0/M-SEL button when the DED asterisks sequence to the
     ROLL data field.
4.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
5.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Performing an HMCS Alignment
A HMCS alignment is initiated with the COARSE alignment function on the HMCS ALIGN page. Ensure the HMCS
SYMBOLOGY INT knob on the HMCS control panel is rotated out of the OFF position.
To perform an HMCS alignment, perform the following:
1.   ICP Keypad – Press 0/M-SEL to initiate the COARSE
     alignment.
     The COARSE data field on the DED will become highlighted
     and the HUD will display an Alignment Cross. The HMCS will
     display a Coarse Alignment Cross and a “READY” message in
     the lower portion of the HMCS field-of-view (FOV).
2.   Use head movements to adjust the position of the HMCS so
     that both alignment crosses are aligned with each other.                   2. Align both crosses

3.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Depress.
     The “READY” message will change to an “ALIGNING”
     message. After several seconds, during which both crosses
     must remain aligned, the “ALIGNING” message will be
     replaced with an “ALIGN OK” message.
4.   ICP Keypad – Press 0/M-SEL to accept the alignment.
     The COARSE data field will be de-highlighted and the DED
     Asterisks will automatically move to the AZ/EL data field.
5.   ICP Keypad – Press 0/M-SEL to initiate the AZ/EL alignment.
                                                                          3. Hold head steady until ALIGN
                                                                                        OK
     The AZ/EL data field on the DED will become highlighted and
     the HUD will display an Alignment Cross. The HMCS will
     display a DX/DY Cross in the center, and a DROLL Cross and
     an “FA DX/DY” message in the lower portion of the HMCS
     FOV.
6.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Position the DX/DY
     cross so that it is aligned with the HUD Alignment Cross.
7.   ICP Keypad – Press 0/M-SEL to accept the alignment.
     The AZ/EL data field will be de-highlighted and the DED
     Asterisks will automatically move to the ROLL data field.             6. Align top cross to HUD cross

8.   ICP Keypad – Press 0/M-SEL to initiate the ROLL alignment.
     The ROLL data field on the DED will become highlighted and
     the HUD will display an Alignment Cross. The HMCS will
     display a DROLL Cross and an “FA DROLL” message in the
     lower portion of the HMCS FOV.
9.   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Position the DROLL
     cross so that it is aligned with the lower vertical stadia line of
     the HUD Alignment Cross.
10. ICP Keypad – Press 0/M-SEL to accept the alignment.
                                                                          9. Align cross to bottom HUD line
     The ROLL data field will be de-highlighted and the DED
     Asterisks will automatically move back to the COARSE data
     field, indicating the HMCS alignment is complete.
AIR-TO-AIR EMPLOYMENT
AIR-TO-AIR EMPLOYMENT
AIR COMBAT PREPARATION
Remember to anticipate what is coming up next and stay ahead of the curve. You do not have to wait until you
are about to make an attack to set the aircraft up.
When entering an area where you expect to encounter enemy aircraft, you will want to take the following steps.
     1.   Position the Master Arm Switch to ARM. Weapons may be released normally when in the ARM position.
          If the Master Arm switch is placed in the OFF position, weapon release is inhibited.




     2.   Press the A-A Master Mode Button on the ICP to place the fire control system in Air-to-Air Missile (AAM)
          Mode.




This is one method for preparing the aircraft for an air-to-air attack. There are also two air-to-air override modes
that can be quickly selected using HOTAS commands. Those are described below.
DOGFIGHT AND MISSILE OVERRIDE MODES
Two override modes are available to quickly configure the aircraft for an air-to-air engagement: Dogfight and
Missile Override. These modes are selected using the DOGFIGHT switch located on the throttle grip. It is a
three-position switch that overrides any mode except emergency jettison.




                                                                                     DOGFIGHT Switch




     •    DOGFIGHT (outboard). This mode provides symbology on the HUD for both 20mm gun firing and AIM-
          9 Sidewinder missile delivery.
     •    MSL OVRD (inboard, unlabeled). This provides symbology for AIM-120 missile firing only. If no AIM-
          120 is loaded, AIM-9s are selected.
     •    Center position. Returns to the last selected master mode.
Requests for master mode changes made using the ICP will be ignored while either of these modes are active.
Changes to missile or radar settings made while either override mode is active will be saved throughout the
mission. A common technique is to configure the displays, radar, and missiles for each mode as desired during
ground operations. This provides three distinct weapon delivery options (Dogfight, Missile Override and Default)
without the need to remove your hands from the controls.


Dogfight Mode
With the switch in the DOGFIGHT (outboard) position, the HUD is configured for Gun and AIM-9 missile firing.
The left MFD is configured with the radar in ACM Boresight mode and the right MFD is configured with the
Dogfight SMS page.
The Dogfight HUD combines elements of the Missile and Guns HUD modes into one decluttered display. Note
that the heading bar, flight path marker and attitude bars are removed.
              Missile Diamond

              Acceleration (G)                                                       EEGS Gunsight



                                                                                     Dynamic Launch Zone

           Calibrated Airspeed                                                       Baro Altitude



                Missile Reticle
            Master Arm Status                                                        Attitude Arc

                        Mode
                                                                                     Slant Range
                     Bullseye




See the sections on Air to Air Gunnery and AIM-9 Sidewinder Employment for details on each display and how to
use them.


Missile Override Mode
With the switch in the Missile Override (inboard) position, the HUD is configured for AIM-120 missile firing. The
left MFD is configured with the radar in RWS mode and the right MFD is configured with the Missile SMS page.
See the section on AIM-120 AMRAAM Employment for details on each display and how to use them.
M61A1 20MM CANNON
The M61A1 20mm automatic gun system provides the pilot with a formidable weapon capability. It is a six-barrel
Gatling type gun mounted in the left strake of the aircraft. The system has a capacity of 512 rounds of ammunition
fired at 6,000 rounds per minute.


Gun Dispersion
Rounds fired from any gun system do not follow a perfectly straight path but are dispersed in a cone shaped
pattern after they leave the gun’s muzzle. The dispersion pattern becomes a larger and larger cone as slant range
increases. The density of rounds within the cone becomes less and less as the edge of the cone is approached.
The average dispersion of the M61A1 is 8 mils diameter for 80% of the rounds fired and 12 mils for 100% of the
rounds fired.1 USAF units maintain a boresight program to ensure gun systems installed on aircraft continue to
meet these specifications while in operational use.
One mil is equal to 1/1000 of a radian so 8 mils equals an 8 foot diameter circle at 1,000 feet range and 12 mils
equals a 12 foot diameter circle. The size of the circle continues to increase with range.




In practical terms, this means you have some leniency in accuracy when firing the gun. In this example, the
green gun pipper is a 4-mil diameter circle. This is where bullets are most dense within the cone. The red shaded
area is the 8-mil circle 80% of the rounds will pass through at the target range. The orange shaded area is the
12-mil circle that 100% of the rounds will pass through at the target range.




The dispersion pattern of rounds fired from the gun is a circle only if the target is perpendicular to the flight path.
It resembles an ellipse when firing against a horizontal target on the ground.




1
  This is based on MIL-DTL-45500/1A that states “At a range of 1,000 inches, 80 percent of a 75 round (min.) burst shall be completely within an 8.0
inch diameter circle for accuracy” and the manufacturer’s data sheet that states “8 milliradians diameter, 80 percent circle”.
 Summary
        1.       Select A-A master mode [1] or DGFT override mode [3]
        2.       Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
        3.       Acquire target using ACM radar mode (optional)
        4.       Fly the EEGS funnel and pipper onto the target
        5.       Squeeze the Trigger [Space] to the second detent to fire the gun



Air to Air Gunnery
   1.        There are two ways to get into the correct SMS configuration for air-to-air gunnery. They are:
             •     Select the Air-to-Air Gunnery operating mode on the MFD by pressing OSB 1 until GUN
                   is displayed, or
             •     Position the Dogfight/Missile Override (DOGFIGHT) Switch to DGFT.
             This provides symbology on the HUD for both 20mm gun firing and A-A missile delivery.



                                                                                      Gun Status
                 Operating Mode

                      Sub-mode

                                                                                      Rounds Remaining




                                                                                      System Status




   2.        Verify A-A GUN symbology is displayed in the HUD.
The Enhanced Envelope Gun Sight (EEGS) provides different levels of information depending on
whether the radar is locked on the target.
Level I is a failure mode that only displays the Boresight Cross in the event of a Rate Sensor Unit
(RSU) and INS failure. It should almost never be encountered.
Level II provides a prediction of the bullet path when there is no radar lock. The Boresight Cross,
EEGS Funnel and Multiple Reference Gunsight (MRGS) Lines are provided.
Level III and IV are intermediate levels that lead to the Level V display. These are usually not seen
by the pilot.
Level V is displayed after radar lock-on and a firing solution has been computed using that data.
Additional references in the HUD include the Target Designator, T-Symbol, Range to Target,
Closure Rate and Level V Pipper.


   Boresight Cross



                                                                           EEGS Funnel




 Master Arm Status

  EEGS Sub-mode

                                                                           MRGS Lines




                           Level II Symbology (no radar lock)

Boresight Cross. This symbol is always available and shows the boresight direction. This is the
direction rounds will travel before other influences like gravity or air resistance take effect.
EEGS Funnel. Each point along the funnel represents the target at a specific range for which the gun
is correctly aimed. In other words, an aircraft whose wings are the same width as the funnel is at the
correct range to be hit by rounds fired at that moment.
As the range decreases, the target size will increase. As this occurs, you must place the target higher
in the funnel to keep the target wingspan just touching the sides of the funnel. This results in placing
the target higher in the HUD or, more importantly, closer to the Boresight Cross which results in reduced
lead for the reduced range.
The target aircraft wingspan must be known for the funnel to provide accurate range information.
Multiple Reference Gunsight Lines. The MRGS sight is composed of a series of five line segments
pointing toward the Gun Bore Line, and spaced in an arc near the bottom of the HUD. They aid in lining
up long range, high aspect shots by providing the correct lateral aiming solution so the target flies up
the funnel.
     When using an MRGS line, if the target is smaller than the line, it is either out of range or moving faster
     than anticipated and requires extra lead. If the target is larger than the MRGS line, the target is moving
     slower than anticipated and will require less lead.




         Boresight Cross




            EEGS Funnel


                                                                                  In-Range Cue

                                                                                  Target Range Caret



                                                                                  Target Slant Range
       Level V Pipper                                                             Closure Rate

       Target Aspect Caret

                                                                                  T-Symbol




                                Level V Symbology (with radar lock)

      Target Designator. This symbol is centered on the locked radar target. The triangular Target
      Aspect Caret shows the target’s aspect angle. Maximum effective gun range is shown by an In-
      Range Cue, two small lines on the outside of the symbol. The position of the Target Range Caret
      indicates the range to the locked target. Each o’clock position represents 1,000 feet of range, so:
            •     12 o’clock = 12,000 ft
            •     9 o’clock = 9,000 ft
            •     6 o’clock = 6,000 ft
            •     3 o’clock = 3,000 ft
      Target Range. The distance to the locked target. Tenths of a mile are displayed for ranges greater
      than one mile. Hundreds of feet are displayed at ranges less than one mile.
      Closure Rate. The rate of closure with the target in knots.
      T-Symbol. This symbol shows two firing solutions for the locked target. The + symbol, or ‘one-G
      pipper’ shows the lead angle against a non-maneuvering target. The small horizontal bar, or ‘nine-G
      pipper’ shows the lead angle for a target turning at maximum sustained rate. These may be used as
      a backup in situations the Level V Pipper is not displayed.
      Two maneuver potential lines are displayed on either side of the 1g pipper. The longer the lines, the
      greater the out-of-plane maneuver potential of the target.
      Level V Pipper. This represents the gunfire solution computed for the target’s current range and
      rates. The goal is to stabilize this pipper over the target and fire.
3.   Maneuver your aircraft to frame the target aircraft within the EEGS funnel.
     Each point along the funnel represents the target at a specific range for which the gun is correctly
     aimed. In other words, an aircraft whose wings are the same width as the funnel is at the correct range
     to be hit by rounds fired at that moment.
     Place the enemy aircraft in the funnel so that the wingtips touch the edges or the Level V Pipper is
     stabilized over the target.


4.   Squeeze the trigger all the way to the second detent to fire the gun when the wingtips
     touch the funnel (Level II) or Pipper is over the target (Level V).
     Target range greatly affects gun effectiveness. As the rounds come out of the gun, they will gradually
     disperse and lose velocity. Increased dispersion and loss of velocity reduce the accuracy and
     effectiveness of the gun. The top of funnel represents the minimum range of approximately 600 feet.
     The bottom of the funnel represents the maximum range of approximately 3,000 feet. If the target is
     smaller than the bottom of the funnel, it is out of range.




        Boresight Cross




                                                                               EEGS Funnel




                                                                               MRGS Lines




                               Level II Symbology (no radar lock)
              Boresight Cross




              Level V Pipper




                                    Level V Symbology (with radar lock)

An additional symbol known as the Bullets at Target Range (BATR) Symbol is displayed after rounds are
fired. The BATR is displayed as the first real or simulated round passes the target range and is removed after the
last round has passed. This is only available with a radar lock and EEGS Level III, IV or V symbology displayed.




             BATR Symbol
AIM-9M/X SIDEWINDER
The AIM-9 is a short-range, infrared-guided missile best used in a dogfight. It is fire-and-forget and can be used
with or without a radar lock. The primary indication of a seeker lock is a higher-pitched lock tone. The seeker can
also be uncaged to ensure the seeker is tracking the target when it has first been sensor-slaved to the target.
Note that the AIM-9 can be decoyed by flares and it’s a good idea to ensure you have a good seeker lock before
launching an AIM-9 with flares in the seeker field of view.

  Summary
          1.       Select AAM [4] or DGFT [3] master mode
          2.       Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
          3.       Acquire target using radar (optional)
          4.       Maneuver until target is in launch zone
          5.       Depress Uncage switch [C] to command missile track (if required)
          6.       Verify missile diamond is on target and lock tone is audible
          7.       Depress Weapon Release [RAlt]+[Space] switch to fire missile



AIM-9M/X Employment
     1.        There are two ways to get into the correct SMS configuration for firing an AIM-9. They are:
               •      Select AIM-9s on the MFD by pressing OSB 7 until AIM-9s are displayed, or
               •      Position the Dogfight/Missile Override (DOGFIGHT) Switch to DGFT.
               This overrides any other master mode and configures the displays for air combat. The DOGFIGHT
               position provides symbology on the HUD for both 20mm gun firing and A-A missile delivery. The MSL
               position provides symbology on the HUD for A-A missile delivery only.




                    Operating Mode

                        Field of View
                                                                                        Selected Weapon


                        Line of Sight




                                                                                        Argon Cooling Status




                   Available Stations
     The number and type of missiles is displayed next to OSB 7. The stations with missiles loaded are
     displayed at the bottom and the selected station is boxed. Step through available stations with the
     Missile Step button or by selecting the adjacent OSB.
     SPOT/SCAN commands the missile seeker to either scan in a narrow field of view (SPOT) or wide
     field of view (SCAN). The wider field of view is achieved by seeker nutation around the line of sight.
     Detection range is decreased when SCAN is used. SCAN mode is not currently implemented.
     SLAVE/BORE commands the missile to either follow the radar line of sight (SLAVE) or keep looking
     straight ahead down the boresight (BORE). Pressing and holding the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch
     overrides the current selected option. Releasing the control returns to the option selected on the MFD.
     WARM/COOL activates or deactivates argon cooling of the seeker. This should be set to COOL
     prior to an engagement to cool the seeker and increase detection sensitivity. COOL is
     selected automatically when entering DGFT or MSL Override mode. Argon supply duration varies
     depending on outside air temperature, pressure, and bottle charge level at installation, but the average
     duration is 90 minutes.
2.   Verify A-A Missile symbology is displayed in the HUD.
     The air-to-air HUD provides information on the status and targeting of air-to-air missiles. Most of the
     symbology from the NAV mode is retained but several new features are added to aid in target
     acquisition and missile launch.
     The Missile Diamond indicates the position of the AIM-9 seeker head. This starts at the seeker
     boresight position but unlatches to follow the radar line of sight or track a locked target when a lock is
     achieved.
     The Missile Reticle shows the seeker field of view. This will be shown as different sizes depending
     on the SPOT/SCAN field of view setting chosen on the MFD.



                                                                                 Missile Diamond




                                                                                 Missile Reticle




      Master Arm Status


      Missiles Remaining




3.   Acquire target using radar (optional).
     Perhaps the most common and easiest way to target an aircraft with the AIM-9 is to acquire a target
     with one of the ACM Radar Modes. This slews the AIM-9 seeker to the radar target if SLAVE is selected
     on the missile. This results in an AIM-9 lock if the target is in range and other IR detection conditions
     are met.
     4.     Maneuver until target is in launch zone.
            Fly the missile reticle in the HUD over a target. If the missile detects enough IR energy from the target,
            target detection is indicated by an audio missile detection tone (growling sound).
     5.     Press Uncage switch to command missile self-track.
            When the AIM-9 seeker detects a target, it can be uncaged by pressing the Cage/Uncage button to
            allow the seeker lock on and follow the target within the confines of the missile seeker’s field of view.
            The Missile Diamond latches to the target when locked.
     6.     Verify missile diamond is on target and lock tone is audible.
            The missile growl will become high pitched when the target is locked. A Target Designator Box will
            be present over a target locked with radar. If firing against a radar target, the Missile Diamond
            should be over the Target Designator box. The Target Range is displayed if radar is used.




                                                                                               Dynamic Launch Zone



          Target Designator Box


               Missile Diamond




                                                                                               Target Range




The Dynamic Launch Zone (DLZ) will be displayed on the right side of the HUD when a target is designated
with the radar. Monitor the DLZ and assess the threat situation to determine the optimal missile firing point. The
missile diamond flashes when the target is within maximum aerodynamic range (Raero). The missile reticle
flashes when the target is within maximum maneuvering range (Rtr, when the missile would be effective against
even a target that immediately turns and runs).

                                                                      Range Scale

                                                                      Maximum Missile Range



                                                                     Maximum Missile Range
                                                                     vs Maneuvering Target


                                                                      Closure Rate and Range


                                                                      Minimum Missile Range
     7.   Press the Weapon Release switch to fire the missile.
          The missile will attempt to intercept the target and the next missile in sequence will be selected. The
          AIM-9 is a fire and forget weapon so there is no need to continue tracking the target.


AIM-9M/X HMCS Missile BORE Employment
The Helmet Mounted Cueing System (HMCS) allows the AIM-9M or AIM-9X missiles to slave to the HMCS Aiming
Cross when BORE mode is selected on the missile. This is useful in situations where no radar lock is possible or
desired. This can be thought of as normal AIM-9 employment, except the HMCS line of sight is used instead of
the HUD line of sight. The mechanization is otherwise the same.
     1.   Turn on the Helmet Mounted Display (HMCS) symbology.
          Power to the HMCS is selected from the HMCS Symbology control knob on the left auxiliary console.
          Rotating the knob clockwise from the OFF position to INC (increase) provides power to the HMCS.
          Continued clockwise rotation increases symbology brightness.




     2.   Select AIM-9s on the MFD by pressing OSB 7 until AIM-9s are displayed, or
          position the Dogfight/Missile Override (DOGFIGHT) Switch to DGFT.
          Symbology and functions are identical to non-HMCS employment. Set the Line-of-Sight mode to
          BORE to use the HMCS for AIM-9M/X targeting without radar.




             Operating Mode

                  Field of View
                                                                                    Selected Weapon


                 Line of Sight



                                                                                    Argon Cooling Status




            Available Stations
3.   Acquire the target in the HMCS.
     With the AIM-9 set to BORE and the HMCS on, the seeker will follow the Dynamic Aiming Cross in
     the HMCS display. The aiming cross is treated as the boresight position. Simply look at the target
     instead of flying the aircraft all the way into position for an AIM-9 lock.
     Remember, you will still be constrained by the missile seeker gimbal limits when looking around. The
     Missile Diamond shows where the missile seeker is looking. If you look beyond the missile seeker
     gimbal limits, the diamond symbol will be displayed with an “X” through it and will be clamped to the
     edge of the HMCS display area.
     The other symbology on the display intentionally mimics the symbology from the HUD.




                                                                                  Missile Diamond



     Master Arm Status
                                                                                  Dynamic Aiming Cross
     Missiles Remaining /
     System Mode




4.   Press Uncage switch to command missile seeker track.
     When the AIM-9 seeker detects a target, it can be uncaged by pressing the Cage/Uncage button.
     This allows the seeker to lock on and follow the target within the confines of the missile seeker’s gimbal
     limits. The Missile Diamond latches to the target when the seeker has locked on.
                                                                                     Dynamic Aiming Cross




                                                                                    Target




                                                                                    Missile Diamond




    5.   Verify missile diamond is on target and lock tone is audible.
         The missile growl will become high pitched when the target is locked. The Missile Diamond should
         be latched to the target and no longer follow the Aiming Cross.
    6.   Press the Weapon Release switch to fire the missile.
         The missile will track the target and the next missile in sequence will be selected. The AIM-9 is a fire
         and forget weapon so there is no need to continue tracking the target.


AIM-9M/X HMCS Radar BORE Employment
The Helmet Mounted Cueing System (HMCS) allows the Fire Control Radar to slave to the HMCS Aiming Cross
when ACM BORE radar mode is selected. This can be thought of as normal AIM-9 employment, except the HMCS
line of sight is used instead of the HUD line of sight. The mechanization is otherwise the same.
    1.   Turn on the Helmet Mounted Display (HMCS) symbology.
         Power to the HMCS is selected from the HMCS Symbology control knob on the left auxiliary console.
         Rotating the knob clockwise from the OFF position to INC (increase) provides power to the HMCS.
         Continued clockwise rotation increases symbology brightness.




    2.   Select AIM-9s on the MFD by pressing OSB 7 until AIM-9s are displayed, or
         position the DOGFIGHT Switch to DGFT.
     Symbology and functions are identical to non-HMCS employment. Set the Line-of-Sight mode to
     SLAVE to use the HMCS and radar for AIM-9M/X targeting.




        Operating Mode

             Field of View
                                                                                 Selected Weapon


            Line of Sight



                                                                                 Argon Cooling Status




       Available Stations




3.   Select ACM BORE radar mode, press TMS forward, and acquire the target in the HMCS.
     With the ACM BORE radar mode selected and the HMCS on, the radar will follow the Dynamic Aiming
     Cross in the HMCS display. The aiming cross is treated as the boresight position. Press TMS Forward
     once, then simply look at the target instead of flying the aircraft all the way into position for a radar
     lock.
     Remember, you will still be constrained by the radar gimbal limits when looking around. The ACM
     BORE Symbol shows where the radar is pointing. If you look too far off the aircraft boresight, the
     radar will not be able to follow.
     The Target Range is displayed after radar lock. The other symbology on the display intentionally
     mimics the symbology from the HUD.
                                                                                  ACM BORE Symbol

     Master Arm Status

        Missile Diamond                                                           Dynamic Aiming Cross


     Missiles Remaining /
     System Mode                                                                  Target Range




4.   Achieve radar lock in ACM BORE Mode.
     The radar will lock the first target detected within the ACM Bore Symbol. A Target Designator Box
     will be present over a target locked with radar.
     With the AIM-9 line of sight set to SLAVE, the seeker will slew to the radar line of sight. When the AIM-
     9 seeker detects a target, it can be uncaged by pressing the Cage/Uncage button. This allows the
     seeker to lock on and follow the target within the confines of the missile seeker’s gimbal limits. The
     Missile Diamond latches to the target when the seeker has locked on.




                                                                                 Dynamic Launch Zone




                                                                                 Target Designator Box
        Missile Diamond



                                                                                 Slant Range




     The Dynamic Launch Zone (DLZ) will be displayed on the right side of the HMCS when a target is
     designated with the radar. Monitor the DLZ and assess the threat situation to determine the optimal
     missile firing point. The missile diamond flashes when target is within maximum range against a
     maneuvering target.
                                                              Range Scale

                                                              Maximum Missile Range



                                                              Maximum Missile Range
                                                              vs Maneuvering Target


                                                              Closure Rate and Range


                                                              Minimum Missile Range




5.   Verify missile diamond is on target and lock tone is audible.
     The missile growl will become high pitched when the target is locked. The Missile Diamond should
     be latched to the target.
6.   Press the Weapon Release switch to fire the missile.
     The missile will attempt to intercept the target and the next missile in sequence will be selected. The
     AIM-9 is a fire and forget weapon so there is no need to continue tracking the target.
AIM-120 AMRAAM
The AIM-120 AMRAAM is an Active Radar-Homing (ARH) air-to-air missile that can self-guide to a target using an
active radar seeker in its nose. The missile is guided initially via datalink commands from the launching aircraft,
and transitions to onboard active radar homing once within range. Because of the active seeker, the pilot can
engage multiple targets at once without needing to support the missile for its entire time of flight.
The AIM-120 is a medium range missile and can engage targets outside 20 nm. However, engagement range is
highly dependent on target aspect, engagement altitude, launch speed, and target post-launch maneuvering. As
such, the engagement range of the AIM-120 can be less than 10 nm in some situations.
In WVR combat, the AIM-120 can also be launched in BORE mode without a radar lock. Once the missile is
launched, it will track and attempt to hit the first target it detects within the AIM-120 reticle on the HUD.


SMS Format
With AIM-120s selected, the SMS format appears as shown:




              Operating Mode


                                                                                        Selected Weapon


                  Line of Sight




             Available Stations




Line of Sight. When set to SLAVE, missile radar line of sight is slaved to the aircraft’s radar. The missile will
receive datalink steering from the launching aircraft until it’s within radar range, then it will attempt to track the
target. When set to BORE, the missile’s radar scans straight ahead. It will track the first detected target after
launch. Depressing the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch also cycles between SLAVE and BORE modes.
HUD Symbology

No Target Lock




                                                                                         Missile Diamond




            Master Arm Status
                                                                                         Allowable Steering
            Missiles Remaining                                                           Error Circle




Master Arm Status. Displays “ARM” when Master Arm is on.
Missiles Remaining. Displays the number of missiles remaining and “MRM” for medium-range missile.
Missile Diamond. Indicates missile radar line of sight. This is initialized at seeker boresight position but will
slew to target LOS when SLAVE mode is selected, and a target is locked.
Allowable Steering Error Circle (ASEC). Indicates the zone in which the Attack Steering Cue (ASC) should
be located prior to launch to hit the target with a high probability kill (PK). The ASC is displayed after radar lock.
The ASEC shows the maximum angular steering error probability. In other words, the circle increases in size
when the distance to the target intercept point decreases, which means that as the distance decreases, the
missile can be launched with greater steering error.
With Target Lock


            Relative Angle Off
                                                                                    Radar Target Locator Line




            Allowable Steering
            Error Circle
                                                                                    Dynamic Launch Zone
           Attack Steering Cue


                                                                                    Target Range




Relative Angle-Off. Displays the angular difference between aircraft heading and target bearing.
Dynamic Launch Zone. Displays information about the missile’s capabilities against a target at its current
range.

                                                             Range Scale


                                                                RAERO


                                                          Closure Rate and Range


                                                                   RTR


                                                          Radar Activation Range


                                                                   RMIN


                                                             Countdown Timer




Range Scale. Indicates the range represented by the highest tick mark.
RAERO (aerodynamic range). The maximum kinematic range of the missile. A shot at this distance would only be
effective against a target that continues its current course and speed and does not maneuver.
Closure Rate and Range. The caret indicates the current target range against the DLZ, and the adjacent
number is the closure rate in knots.
RTR (turn-and-run range). The maximum range where the missile is guaranteed to reach the target regardless of
target maneuvering. A shot at this distance would hit a target that immediately turns 180° away from the missile
while maintaining speed.
Radar Activation Range. The range at which the missile will activate its own radar, and no longer needs
continued support from the launching aircraft.
RMIN (minimum range). The closest range that allows the missile to activate its seeker, lock a target, arm, and
detonate safely.
Countdown Timer. Displayed after missile launch. Displays “A” followed by the number of seconds until the
missile activates its seeker, then “T” followed by the number of seconds until predicted impact.


FCR Post-Launch Symbology
Following AIM-120 launch, the FCR format will display different symbols to indicate different missile employment
statuses:


                      A target with an AMRAAM in flight is displayed in magenta with a solid “tail” opposite its trend
                      vector.



                      A target with at least one AMRAAM in flight that has gone active is displayed in red, and the tail
                      flashes.




                      A target with at least one AMRAAM that has reached predicted time of impact is displayed with
                      a flashing “X” through it.




AIM-120 Employment
  Summary
          1.        Select A-A master mode [1] or MSL override mode [4]
          2.        Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
          3.        Acquire target using radar (optional but recommended)
          4.        Maneuver until target is in launch zone
          5.        Depress Weapon Release [RAlt]+[Space] switch to fire missile

     1.        There are two ways to select the AIM-120 for employment:
                •      Select AIM-120s on the MFD by pressing OSB 7 until AIM-120s are displayed, or
                •      Position the Dogfight/Missile Override Switch to MSL OVRD. This overrides any other master
                       mode and configures the displays for air combat. The MSL position provides symbology on the
                       HUD for A-A missile delivery and selects the longest-range missile type loaded.
     2.        Verify A-A Missile symbology is displayed in the HUD.
               The air-to-air HUD provides information on the status and targeting of air-to-air missiles. Most of the
               symbology from the NAV mode is retained but several new features are added to aid in target
               acquisition and missile launch.
    3.   Acquire target using the radar
         Typically, a target will be locked using RWS, TWS, or any ACM radar sub-mode and the AIM-120 set
         to SLAVE.
         When the locked target is outside the HUD field on view as shown below, a Target Locator Line
         (TLL) extends from the Gun Cross and points directly at the target. The Relative Angle is displayed
         next to the Gun Cross showing the angle in degrees between the cross and the target.
         The Allowable Steering Error Circle (ASEC) changes size and the Attack Steering Cue (ASC)
         becomes visible. The Target Range is displayed after target radar lock.
    4.   Maneuver until Attack Steering Cue (ASC) is inside the Allowable Steering Error Circle
         (ASEC)
         The size of the Allowable Steering Error Circle will vary depending on the target range and aspect.
         Ensure that the Attack Steering Cue is located as close to the Allowable Steering Error Circle
         center as possible when firing to achieve the best performance out of the missile.
         When the target enters the HUD, the Target Designator Box will be displayed over the target and
         the Missile Diamond will track that location.




         Target Designator Box


              Missile Diamond
                                                                                     Dynamic Launch Zone




            Allowable Steering
            Error Circle


                                                                                      Attack Steering Cue




         Monitor the Dynamic Launch Zone and assess the threat situation to determine the optimal missile
         firing point.
    5.   Press and hold the Weapon Release switch to fire the missile.
         The missile will track the target and the next missile in sequence will be selected.
         The AIM-120 may also be employed in BORE mode without a radar lock on the target. This is used
         when a quick shot must be taken, or no radar emissions are desired. The missile radar will go active
         at launch and guide on the first target it detects so use this mode with care.


Simultaneous Employment Against Multiple Targets
The F-16C FCR can support up to four simultaneous in-flight AMRAAMS against up to four targets. Simultaneous
employment is accomplished in TWS or RWS DTT mode.
Summary
      8.    Select A-A master mode [1] or MSL override mode [4]
      9.    Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
      10.   Acquire at least two targets using TWS or DTT
      11.   Maneuver until all targets are in launch zone
      12.   Depress Weapon Release [RAlt]+[Space] to fire first missile
      13.   Press TMS Right to cycle bug to next target
      14.   Depress Weapon Release [RAlt]+[Space] to fire second missile

 1.     Select AIM-120s for employment:
              a.   Activate A-A master mode using the ICP, then on the SMS format, press OSB 6 until AIM-
                   120 is selected; or
              b.   Place the Dogfight/Missile Override switch in MSL OVRD.
 2.     Set the Master Arm switch to Arm.
 3.     Acquire at least two targets using TWS or DTT.
        In RWS mode, move the acquisition cursor over the first target and press TMS Forward to designate
        it. Then, move the acquisition cursor over the second target and press TMS Forward to designate it.
        In TWS mode, move the acquisition cursor over each target and press TMS Forward to designate it as
        a System Target. You may designate up to four System Targets for AMRAAM employment.




                                                                                  Bugged Target


                                                                                  System Target




 4.     Maneuver until all targets are within the launch zone. DLZ information is only displayed for the
        current bugged target. Use TMS Right to cycle between bugged targets and track DLZ status for each.
 5.     Depress Weapons Release to fire first missile, then press TMS Right to cycle the bug to the next
        target, and press Weapons Release again to fire the second missile. If using TWS, you can repeat this
        process up to four times total.
  AIR-TO-GROUND
AIR-TO-GROUND
  EMPLOYMENT EMPLOYMENT
ATTACK PREPARATION
Prior to reaching the target area and conducting your attack, you will want to configure several aircraft systems
ahead of time so that you can most efficiently communicate and set up your attack. When at a minimum of 40
nm from the target, you will want to take the following steps.
     1.   Position the Master Arm Switch to ARM. Weapons may be released normally when in the ARM position.
          If the Master Arm switch is placed in the OFF position, weapon release is inhibited.
     2.   Position the Laser Arm Switch to ARM. This is required to enable firing of the laser designator. Laser
          firing is inhibited with the switch set to OFF.




     3.   Place the fire control system in A-G mode by pressing the A-G Master Mode Button on the ICP.
M61A1 20MM CANNON STRAFE
The M61A1 20MM automatic gun system provides the pilot with a formidable weapon capability. It is a six-barrel
Gatling type gun mounted in the left strake of the aircraft. The system has a capacity of 512 rounds of ammunition
fired at 6,000 rounds per minute.

  Summary
          1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
          2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
          3.     Set Laser Arm Switch to Arm if laser ranging updates are desired
          4.     Select STRF sub-mode on SMS MFD
          5.     Fly the Pipper onto the target
          6.     Squeeze the Trigger [Space] to the second detent to fire the gun



Target Attack
Upon selection of the A-G master mode, the SMS Air-to-Ground (SMS A-G) page is displayed on the right MFD.
Based on the priority weapon, the information on the SMS A-G page can vary. Follow these steps to achieve the
correct configuration and attack ground targets with the gun:
     1.        Select the STRF sub-mode on the MFD by pressing OSB 1 until GUN is displayed.




                  Operating Mode                                                            Gun Status


               A-G Strafe Sub-mode

                                                                                            Rounds Remaining




                                                                                            In-Range Cue Distance




                                                                                            System Status




     2.        Verify STRF symbology is displayed in the HUD.
               The Strafe Reticle is the default air to ground gunsight and provides aiming information required to fire
               the gun effectively. The center of the reticle is the aiming pipper and represents where the gun rounds
               will go assuming the target is within range. Using the pipper, it is simply a case of “putting the thing
               on the thing” and pulling the trigger.
               Line of sight range is indicated by the digital range numeric on the bottom right of the HUD and the
               ranging reticle that winds or unwinds within the reticle. The position of the ranging reticle indicates the
     slant range to the pipper’s position on the ground. Each quarter circle tick on the strafe reticle
     represents 3,000 feet of slant range, so:
          •      12 o’clock = 12,000 ft
          •      9 o’clock = 9,000 ft
          •      6 o’clock = 6,000 ft
          •      3 o’clock = 3,000 ft
     The in-range cue position may be set by the pilot provide an additional visual cue for the effective
     range against the planned target.



               Gun Cross
                                                                               Strafe Reticle



          Ranging Reticle



              In-Range Cue                                                     Pipper




       Master Arm Status

      A-G Strafe Sub-mode                                                      Slant Range




3.   Maneuver your aircraft to position the pipper on target.
     One technique is to place the pipper short of the target and allow it to track along the ground until it
     reaches the target. This will happen naturally as slant range decreases.




     Laser ranging may be performed to improve the computed firing solution if a targeting pod is installed.
     (See Laser Ranging for more information.)
4.   Squeeze the trigger all the way to the second detent to fire the gun when the pipper is
     over the target and you are within effective range.
     In this example, the pipper is on-target at a slant range of about 5,500 feet as shown by the position
     on the ranging reticle.
          Slant range greatly affects gun effectiveness. As the rounds come out of the gun, they will gradually
          disperse and lose velocity. Increased dispersion and loss of velocity reduce the accuracy and
          effectiveness of the gun. Effective engagement range is generally from 2,500 to 7,000 feet. For
          armored vehicles, closer is better, and you should attack from behind the target where its armor is
          weakest.
          When lining up a shot, be careful to avoid target fixation. Target fixation can lead to you not noticing
          an unseen threat or pressing the attack too close. Don’t make yourself an easy target for the machine
          gun on the top of that APC!
Once you have reached the minimum attack range, break off in both the horizontal and vertical to avoid hostile
return fire. You may also wish to release flares in case an infrared-SAM near the enemy target has been launched
at you, but you did not see it.


In-Range Cue Update
The position of the In-Range Cue on the reticle may be updated by selecting the OSB next to the In-Range Cue
distance on the SMS page.




                                                                                     In-Range Cue Distance
Type in the new in-range cue distance using the OSBs on the left and right of the display and select ENTR. You
may correct numbers entered in error by selecting RCL or return to the SMS page without making changes by
selecting RTN.




                                                                                         In-Range Cue Distance




You will be returned to the SMS page and the new value will be displayed. The cue will be placed on the HUD
Strafe Reticle at that new distance.




                                                                 In-Range Cue Distance
2.75-INCH ROCKETS
Aerial rockets pack more punch than the 20mm gun but are still best used as an area suppression weapon. These
come with different warhead options for different purposes including High Explosive (HE), High Explosive Anti-
Tank (HEAT), and Armor Piercing (AP). White Phosphorus (WP) rounds may also be used for incendiary effect or
to mark targets on the ground with their distinctive white smoke.

  Summary
         1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
         2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
         3.     Set Laser Arm Switch to Arm if laser ranging updates are desired
         4.     Select Rockets and desired options on SMS MFD
         5.     Fly the Pipper onto the target
         6.     Depress the Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to fire the rockets



Target Attack (CCIP)
Upon selection of the A-G master mode, the SMS Air-to-Ground (SMS A-G) page is displayed on the right MFD.
Based on the priority weapon, the information on the SMS A-G page can vary. Follow these steps to achieve the
correct configuration and attack ground targets with rockets in CCIP mode:
    1.        Select the Rockets on the MFD by pressing OSB 6 until rockets are displayed.




                                                                                        Rocket Status
                 Operating Mode

                       Sub-mode



                                                                                        Rockets Remaining
                                                                                        and Type


                                                                                        Single/Pair Option




                                                                                        System Status




    2.        Verify CCIP release mode is selected (OSB 2) and set desired Single/Pair option (OSB 8).
              Rockets may be fired with either Single (SGL) or Pair (PAIR) selected. With SGL selected, rockets will
              be fired from only one launcher. With PAIR selected, rockets will be fired from each rocket launcher,
              assuming launchers are loaded on station 3 and 7.
              Sub-mode
                                                                               Rockets Remaining
                                                                               and Type




                                                                                Single/Pair Option




3.   Verify CCIP Rockets symbology is displayed in the HUD.
     CCIP mode is perhaps the most intuitive means to put a weapon on target and mostly involves placing
     the “death dot” of the CCIP pipper over the target and releasing the weapon… put the thing on the
     thing.
     The center of the CCIP pipper represents where the rockets will go assuming the target is within range.
     Line of sight range is indicated by the digital range numeric on the bottom right of the HUD. An In-
     Range Cue will be displayed over the CCIP pipper when slant range is less than 8,000 feet and rockets
     are most effective.




              Gun Cross




                                                                              CCIP Pipper




       Master Arm Status

                                                                              Slant Range
      CCIP Sub-mode




4.   Maneuver your aircraft to position the CCIP pipper on target.
          One technique is to place the pipper just short of the target and allow it to track along the ground until
          it reaches the target. This will happen naturally as slant range decreases. Monitor slant range displayed
          in the bottom right of the HUD and watch for the in-range cue to appear over the pipper.




          Laser ranging may be performed to improve the computed firing solution if a targeting pod is installed.
          (See Laser Ranging for more information.)
     5.   Press the Weapon Release button to fire the rockets when the CCIP pipper is over the
          target and you are within effective range.
          The In-Range Cue is a line over the CCIP pipper that is displayed when slant range is less than 8,000
          feet. In this example, the pipper is on-target and the in-range cue is displayed.




                                                                               In-Range Cue




          When lining up a shot, be careful to avoid target fixation. Target fixation can lead to you not noticing
          an unseen threat or pressing the attack too close. Don’t make yourself an easy target for the machine
          gun on the top of that APC!
Once you have reached the minimum attack range, break off in both the horizontal and vertical to avoid hostile
return fire. You may also wish to release flares in case an infrared-SAM near the enemy target has been launched
at you, but you did not see it.
UNGUIDED BOMBS
Unguided bombs that the F-16C can employ fall into three categories: General Purpose (GP), Cluster, and
Training.


General Purpose Bombs
Mk-82 LDGP. The standard Mk-82 is a low drag “slick” bomb, also referred to as a Low Drag General Purpose
(LDGP) bomb. The bomb is aerodynamically streamlined with four conical tail fins for flight stability. The bomb
has a thin steel jacket that contributes to fragmentation effects.
The Mk-82 may be carried singly on a Wing Weapons Pylon (WWP) or three may be loaded on a Triple Ejector
Rack (TER)
The Mk- 82 serves as the basis for several other bombs including the Mk-82 AIR, GBU-12, and GBU-38.
Mk-82 AIR. This version of the Mk-82 adds the BSU-49/B high drag tail assembly, also called a “ballute”. This
allows the bomb to rapidly slow down after release. By slowing down, you can release such a retarded weapon
at low altitude and not be caught in the blast effect of the weapon. You can choose to release the Mk-82AIR in
either retarded or “slick” (no ballute deployed) modes. To drop as a slick, select only a nose fuze, and to release
retarded, select nose/tail or tail fuze setting on the SMS page.
Mk-82 SE. This ‘Snake Eye” version of the Mk-82 pre-dates the Mk-82 AIR and uses fins that deploy from the
Mk-15 tail assembly to slow the bomb’s fall. You can choose to release the Mk-82 Snakeye in either retarded or
“slick” modes. To drop as a slick, select only a nose fuze, and to release retarded, select nose/tail or tail fuze
setting on the SMS page.
Mk-84 LDGP. The Mk-84 is the big brother of the Mk-82 and it weighs 2,039 lbs. with 945 lbs. of H-6 or Tritonal
high explosive. Although most effective against unarmored and lightly armored targets, the Mk-84 can also be
effective against armored targets when dropped in proximity. The Mk-84 can only be mounted on a WWP and
cannot be loaded on a TER.
The Mk-84 forms the basis for other bombs including the GBU-10 and GBU-31 that the F-16C also carries.


Cluster Bombs
CBU-87. The CBU-87 Combined Effects Munitions (CEM) weighs 950 lbs. and is an all-purpose cluster bomb.
The SUU-65 Tactical Munitions Dispenser that makes the body of the bomb contains 202 BLU-97/B Combined
Effects Munitions (CEM) bomblets and they are effective against lightly armored and unarmored targets. The
dispersal footprint of the bomblets depends on the Height of Function (HOF) and RPM spin setting set with dials
on the bomb and displayed on the SMS page. However, the general bomblet footprint coverage is 200 by 400
meters.
The CBU-87 can be mounted singly on a WWP. Only two may be loaded on a TER when wing external fuel tanks
are installed due to clearance constraints. This is commonly referred to as a ‘slant load’.
Each BLU-97/B CEB consists of a shaped charge, a scored steel casing, and a zirconium ring, for anti-armor and
anti-personnel fragmentation and incendiary effects. Each CEB is designed to fragment into 300 fragments. Given
the top attack angle of the weapon, the CEB can be effective against the generally light armor covering the top
of an armored vehicle such as a tank.
CBU-97. The CBU-97 is a 1,000-pound class weapon containing sensor-fuzed sub-munitions in a SUU-66B
Dispenser for specifically attacking armor. This Sensor Fuzed Weapon (SFW) contains 10 BLU-108/B sub-
munitions, and 40 “hockey puck” shaped skeet infrared sensing projectiles.
As with the CBU-87, the dispersal footprint of the bomblets depends on the Height of Function (HOF) set with
dials on the bomb and displayed on the SMS page. The RPM is not applicable on this dispenser. The same carriage
restrictions as the CBU-87 apply: one per WWP and two per TER.


Training Bombs
BDU-33. The BDU-33 is a miniaturized training bomb that mimics the ballistics of larger general-purpose bombs.
The BDU-33 contains a small smoke charge to help round spotting.


Unguided/Laser Guided Bombs SMS Page
The A-G SMS display and procedure for setting up an attack with guided or unguided bombs is very similar for
all types. The initial set-up will only be covered once, with differences in CCIP, CCRP sub-modes covered in
separate sections below.

  Summary
          1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
          2.     Select bombs and set desired options on SMS A-G MFD

Upon selection of the A-G master mode, the SMS Air-to-Ground (SMS A-G) page is displayed on the right MFD.
Based on the priority weapon, the information on the SMS A-G page can vary. Follow these steps to achieve the
correct configuration and attack ground targets with GP bombs in CCIP mode:
     1.        Select the desired weapons on the MFD by pressing OSB 6 until the weapons you want to
               release are displayed.



                                                                                            Weapon Status

                  Operating Mode                                                            Bombs    Remaining
                                                                                            and Type
                        Sub-mode


                                                                                            Selected Profile

                                                                                            Single / Pair Option
                                                                                            and Release Pulses
                    Fuzing Option
                                                                                            Release Interval Distance


                                                                                            Release Pulses Requested




                                                                                            System Status




     2.        Select the desired profile for the selected weapons.
               Two different profiles are pre-set by default. These include typical settings for delivery mode, fuze
               arming option, bomb impact spacing, and release quantity. If a profile already matches your planned
               attack profile, you are all set; no more changes are required! If not, follow the steps that follow in this
               section to set the profile up to your liking.
     Selecting the OSB next to the current profile to cycle between the two options: PROF1 and PROF2.




                                                                               Selected Profile




     Changes to settings made while a profile is selected are saved for later use. These should typically be
     set or verified as part of aircraft startup, although they may be changed at any time.
3.   Select your desired release sub-mode. (OSB 2)
     If a sub-mode other than the one you want is selected, you may press OSB 2 to display the following
     options.
          •    CCIP – Continuously Computed Impact Point
          •    CCRP – Continuously Computed Release Point
          •    DTOS – Dive Toss
          •    LADD – Low Altitude Drogue Delivery
          •    MAN – Manual
     Then, select the OSB next to your desired sub-mode. That will set the new active sub-mode and return
     you to the SMS A-G page.
     Sub-mode Options




     You may also cycle between sub-modes by pressing the Missile Step button on the Side Stick Controller
     (SSC).
4.   Set desired bomb fuzing option. (OSB 18)
     Bombs are typically equipped with two fuzes, one in the nose and one in the tail. These are sometimes
     set with different impact delay settings to provide the pilot with the choice of how the fuze functions
     and when the bomb detonates after impact. Sometimes an instantaneous detonation is desired for
     fragmentation effects and sometimes a delayed detonation is desired to allow target penetration or
     cratering.
     Selecting OSB 18 cycles between three fuze arming options: NOSE, TAIL and NSTL (Nose/Tail). This is
     typically set to NSTL (Nose/Tail) for redundancy unless a specific effect is desired when the weapon
     detonates.




              Fuzing Option
     There are also some special cases where the fuze option changes how the weapon behaves after
     release:
          •    Mk-82 AIR/SE
                   o    NSTL – High Drag
                   o    NOSE – Low Drag
                   o    TAIL – High Drag
          •    CBU-87/97
                   o    NSTL – Bomblets dispense using settings displayed on SMS page
                   o    NOSE – Bomblets dispense immediately after release
                   o    TAIL – Dud
5.   Set desired Single/Pair option. (OSB 8)
     Bombs may be released with either Single (SGL) or Pair (PAIR) selected. With SGL selected, bombs will
     be released from only one station. With PAIR selected, bombs will be released from both opposite
     stations, assuming identical bombs are loaded on stations 4 and 6 or 3 and 7.




                                                                               Single/Pair Option




6.   Set the desired release interval distance if more than one bomb is to be released. (OSB 9)
     The timing between release pulses is computed by the aircraft to space multiple weapons in a ‘stick’
     along the ground at the specified distance. Valid distances range from 10-999 feet. This setting has no
     effect if only one bomb or one pair of bombs is released.
                                                                              Interval Distance




     Type in the new impact spacing distance using the OSBs on the left and right of the display and select
     ENTR. You may correct numbers entered in error by selecting RCL or return to the SMS page without
     making changes by selecting RTN.




                                                                               Impact Spacing Distance




7.   Set the number of release pulses if more than one bomb is to be released. (OSB 10)
     This sets the number of release pulses sent to the weapons stations when the Weapon Release button
     is pressed. For example, a setting of 1 releases only one bomb or pair of bombs at a time while a
     setting of 4 releases four bombs or pairs of bombs at a time. This is commonly known as a ‘ripple
     release’.
                                                                                   Release Pulses




          Type in the desired number of release pulses using the OSBs on the left and right of the display and
          select ENTR. You may correct numbers entered in error by selecting RCL or return to the SMS page
          without making changes by selecting RTN.




                                                                                    Release Pulses




Unguided Bombs CCIP Attack
The Continuously Computed Impact Point (CCIP) mode is a computed visual delivery mode with manual weapon
release. This mode allows a high degree of flexibility since the point on the ground at which the weapon will
impact is continuously indicated by a CCIP Pipper on the HUD. No target designation is required. Place the thing
on the thing and drop the bomb.
Summary
      1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
      2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
      3.     Set Laser Arm Switch to Arm if laser ranging updates are desired
      4.     Select Bombs and desired options on SMS MFD
      5.     Fly the Pipper onto the target
      6.     Depress the Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to expend weapons

 1.        Verify CCIP symbology is displayed in the HUD.
           If the CCIP impact point does not lay within the HUD field of view, the Time Delay Cue (TDC) is shown
           as a short, horizonal line on the Bomb Fall Line. The CCIP Pipper is outside the HUD field of view when
           this is displayed. A second, ‘post-designate CCIP’ technique may be used in this situation but that will
           be covered in the next section.




                                                                                      Flight Path Marker




                                                                                      Bomb Fall Line
                                                                                      Marker

               Time Delay Cue
                                                                                      Pull-Up Anticipation Cue

             Master Arm Status

            CCIP Sub-mode                                                             Slant Range



                  CCIP Pipper




 2.        Maneuver your aircraft to position the CCIP Pipper on target.
           When the TDC is no longer displayed on the Bomb Fall Line, the pipper is in the HUD field of view.
           That will be the impact point if the bombs are released immediately.
           One technique is to place the FPM ahead of the target and the pipper just short of the target. Fly the
           Bomb Fall Line over the target and allow the pipper to track straight up the line. This will happen
           naturally as slant range decreases.
                                                                                 Flight Path Marker


                                                                                 Pull-Up Anticipation Cue


                                                                                 Bomb Fall Line


                Target




                                                                                 CCIP      Pipper
                                                                                 Marker




     Monitor the Pull-Up Anticipation Cue to ensure it does not go above the Flight Path Marker. The Pull-
     Up Anticipation Cue (PUAC) provides a visual representation of the altitude required for the bomb fuze
     to arm or altitude to initiate a pull-up to avoid impacting the ground, whichever is more immediate. It
     moves up toward the Flight Path Marker (FPM) as the aircraft loses altitude. Releasing a bomb with the
     FPM below the PUAC will not give the bomb time to arm and result in a dud.
     Laser ranging may be performed to improve the computed firing solution if a targeting pod is installed.
     (See Laser Ranging for more information.)
3.   Press the Weapon Release button to release the bombs when the CCIP pipper is over the
     target.
     The pipper will be at the center of the ‘stick’ if more than one bomb is released in a ripple delivery.
     Hold the Weapons Release button long enough to ensure all weapons come off. The FPM flashes after
     weapons are released.




               Target
                                                                                 CCIP      Pipper
                                                                                 Marker
          Pull up immediately and take evasive action to avoid flying into bomb fragments and to avoid enemy
          fire.


Unguided Bombs CCIP Attack (Post-Designate)
An additional option for CCIP bombs delivery is available for situations where the target cannot be within the
HUD field of view at release. This can sometimes happen on attacks from a shallow dive angle or high altitude.
The steps to enter CCIP mode are the same as described above. The difference is in when you press and hold
the Weapons Release button.
     1.   Maneuver your aircraft to position the CCIP Pipper on target.
          When the Time Delay Cue is displayed on the Bomb Fall Line, the pipper is not in the HUD field of view,
          however you will still place the pipper over the intended target.
          You will designate that location as the target by pressing and holding the Weapons Release button.
          The fire control computer will do the rest.




              Time Delay Cue




                                                                                      Bomb Fall Line

                CCIP Pipper

                                                                                      Target




          Laser ranging may be performed to improve the computed firing solution if a targeting pod is installed.
          (See Laser Ranging for more information.)
     2.   Press and HOLD the Weapons Release button.
          The HUD symbology displayed is identical to that used for a CCRP delivery. Keep the Flight Path Marker
          aligned with the Steering Line. This will align your aircraft with the target even though the target will
          be out of sight.
          A Solution Cue is displayed at the top of the Steering Line. It will fall down the line as the range
          decreases and the weapon is about to be released.
           Solution Cue




                                                                              Flight Path Marker
           Steering Line




3.   Keep the Weapons Release button held until after the Solution Cue passes the Flight Path
     Marker.
     Keep flying the Flight Path Marker over the Steering Line as the Sulution Cue continues to track
     downward. The bombs are released when the Steering Cue passes the Flight Path Marker.




            Solution Cue




                                                                               Flight Path Marker
           Steering Line




     Hold the Weapons Release button long enough to ensure all weapons come off. The FPM flashes after
     weapons are released. Pull up immediately and take evasive action to avoid flying into bomb fragments
     and to avoid enemy fire.
Unguided Bombs CCRP Attack
The Continuously Computed Release Point (CCRP) mode provides computed, automatic release of bombs. This
can be done from a dive, but also from wings-level or a nose-high attitude.
This mode requires a target designation point from which to build the bombing solution. Command steering is
provided to the appropriate weapon release point and the weapon will release automatically at the proper time
such that the weapons hit the target.

  Summary
         1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
         2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
         3.     Set Laser Arm Switch to Arm if laser ranging updates are desired
         4.     Select Bombs and desired options on SMS MFD
         5.     Set desired steerpoint number or designate target with TGP
         6.     Center FPM on Steering Line
         7.     Depress and hold Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to expend weapons at computed
                point

    1.        Verify CCRP symbology is displayed in the HUD.
              The fire control system provides a Steering Line (SL) to provide steering to the designated target. By
              placing the Flight Path Marker (FPM) on the SL and holding down the Weapon Release Button, the
              weapon will release at the proper time and account for wind.


                 Solution Cue                                                             Gun Cross


              Target Locator Line                                                         Flight Path Marker

                    Steering Line

               Target Designator

                                                                                          Pull-Up Anticipation Cue


               Master Arm Status                                                          Slant Range
              CCRP Sub-mode
                                                                                          Time to Release




              A Solution Cue is displayed at the top of the SL. It will fall down the line as the range decreases and
              the weapons are about to be released.
              When the Target Designator (TD) is outside the HUD field on view as shown above, a Target Locator
              Line (TLL) extends from the Gun Cross pointing directly at the target. The relative angle is displayed
              next to the Gun Cross showing the number of degrees in tens between the cross and the target.
    2.        Designate the desired target.
              To calculate a bombing solution in CCRP mode, a target first must be designated. This can be done by:
                   •      Selecting a Steerpoint that was placed at the target location
          •       Designating a target with the Targeting Pod (if installed)
     Updates to the target location may be made by slewing the TD Box in the HUD or slewing the TGP
     crosshairs onto a new position with the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch.




         Solution Cue
                                                                                 Flight Path Marker

              Steering Line

                                                                                 Pull-Up Anticipation Cue


        Target Designator




                                                                                 Time to Release




     Monitor the Pull-Up Anticipation Cue to ensure it does not go above the Flight Path Marker. The Pull-
     Up Anticipation Cue (PUAC) provides a visual representation of the altitude required for the bomb fuze
     to arm or altitude to initiate a pull-up to avoid impacting the ground, whichever is more immediate. It
     moves up toward the Flight Path Marker (FPM) as the aircraft loses altitude. Releasing a bomb with the
     FPM below the PUAC will not give the bomb time to arm and result in a dud.
     Laser ranging may be performed to improve the computed firing solution if a targeting pod is installed.
     (See Laser Ranging for more information.)
3.   Press and HOLD the Weapon Release button.
     Keep the Flight Path Marker aligned with the Steering Line. This will align your aircraft with the target
     even though the target will be out of sight.
     Time to release counts down at the lower right of the HUD.
         Solution Cue
                                                                              Flight Path Marker



           Steering Line

                                                                              Pull-Up Anticipation Cue




                                                                              Time to Release




     When the Solution Cue begins to move down the Steering Line, about 10 seconds prior to release,
     press and hold the Weapon Release button. This provides the fire control computer consent to release
     the weapons.
4.   Keep the Weapons Release button held until after the Solution Cue passes the Flight Path
     Marker.
     Keep flying the Flight Path Marker over the Steering Line as the Sulution Cue continues to track
     downward. The bombs are released when the Steering Cue passes the Flight Path Marker.




          Solution Cue


                                                                              Flight Path Marker


          Steering Line




                                                                              Time to Release




     Hold the Weapons Release button long enough to ensure all weapons come off. The FPM flashes after
     weapons are released.
LASER-GUIDED BOMBS
The development of laser guided weapons has dramatically improved the accuracy of weapon guidance and
delivery. With the assistance of build-up guidance kits, general GP bombs are turned into laser-guided bombs
(LGBs). The kits consist of a computer- control group (CCG), guidance canards attached to the front of the
warhead to provide steering commands, and a wing assembly attached to the aft end to provide lift. LGBs are
maneuverable, free-fall weapons requiring no electronic interconnect to the aircraft. They have an internal semi-
active guidance system that detects laser energy and guides the weapon to a target illuminated by an external
laser source. The designator can be in the delivery aircraft, another aircraft, or a ground source.
All LGB weapons have a Computer Control Group (CCG), a warhead (bomb body with fuze), and an airfoil group.
The computer section transmits directional command signals to the appropriate pair of canards. The guidance
canards are attached to each quadrant of the control unit to change the flight path of the weapon. The canard
deflections are always full scale (referred to as “bang, bang” guidance).
The LGB flight path is divided into three phases: ballistic, transition, and terminal guidance. During the ballistic
phase, the weapon continues via the unguided trajectory established by the flight path of the delivery aircraft at
the moment of release. In the ballistic phase, the delivery attitude takes on additional importance since
maneuverability of the LGB is related to the weapon velocity during terminal guidance. Therefore, airspeed lost
during the ballistic phase equates to a proportional loss of maneuverability. The transition phase begins at
acquisition. During the transition phase, the weapon attempts to align its velocity vector with the line-of-sight
vector to the target. During terminal guidance, the LGB attempts to keep its velocity vector aligned with the
instantaneous line-of-sight. At the instant alignment occurs, the reflected laser energy centers on the detector
and commands the canards to a trail position, which causes the weapon to fly ballistically with gravity biasing
towards the target.
GBU-10 Paveway II. This Guided Bomb Unit (GBU) weighs 2,562 lbs. and is basically a laser-guided version of
the Mk-84 unguided bomb with a general-purpose warhead. The laser detector on the nose of the seeker detects
the reflected energy of the designating laser at the set laser code. Once dropped, the wing-like airfoil surfaces at
the rear of the bomb extend and are used to maneuver the bomb to the laser designation point. Rather than
smooth and constant input of course-corrections to reach the target, the bomb uses a series of discreet input
corrections and this is often referred to as “bang-bang” guidance mode.
GBU-10 can only be hung from a MAU-12 ejector rack on stations 3, 4, 6, and 7.
Suitable targets for the GBU-10 are large and/or hardened targets that require an accurate and powerful strike.
Such targets often include bridges, bunkers, and hardened command posts.
GBU-12 Paveway II. This GBU is the laser-guided version of the Mk-82 unguided, general purpose bomb. The
GBU-12 guides using the same principles as the GBU-10, the only difference being the bomb the LGB is based
on.
The GBU-12 can be mounted singly on a MAU-12 ejector rack at stations 3, 4, 6, and 7. Only two may be loaded
on a TER when wing external fuel tanks are installed due to clearance constraints. This is commonly referred to
as a ‘slant load’.


Terminal Laser Guidance Codes
The seeker head on each laser guided bomb is set to track only a specific laser pulse rate frequency (PRF) code.
These are manually set by the weapons load crew during ground operations and may not be set from the cockpit
during flight.
To replicate this, the laser code may be set using the mission editor. In this example, the laser code on each
bomb seeker head is 1564.
An additional method to set the bomb seeker laser code is included on the in-game kneeboard. You may access
this using keyboard command [RShift]+[K], then use the [ and ] (bracket) keys to access the page. Use the
keyboard commands listed to the right of each digit to change the laser code.
Bomb seeker laser codes can only be changed using this method on the ground prior to engine start and with
the STA POWER switch on the right console OFF.




The laser designator on the Targeting Pod must be set to match the code on the bomb. (See LASR DED Page for
more information.)


SMS Page
The A-G SMS display and procedures for setting up an attack with guided or unguided bombs are identical. See
the Bombs A-G SMS Page section for procedures.




Laser Guided Bomb CCRP Attack
The Continuously Computed Release Point (CCRP) mode provides computed, automatic release of bombs. This
can be done from a dive, but also from wings-level or a nose-high attitude. The laser guided bomb attack is
identical to unguided bombs with the addition of laser designation with the Targeting Pod (TGP)
This mode requires a target designation point from which to build the bombing solution. Command steering is
provided to the appropriate weapon release point and the weapon will release automatically at the proper time
such that the weapons hit the target.
The bomb laser code must match the TGP laser designator laser code. See the Bomb Seeker Laser Code and
Laser Designator Code sections for procedures.

  Summary
         1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
         2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
         3.     Set Laser Arm Switch to Arm
         4.     Select Bombs and desired options on SMS MFD
         5.     Set desired steerpoint number or designate target with TGP
         6.     Center FPM on Steering Line
         7.     Depress and hold Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to release at the computed point
         8.     Lase target at least 8-12 seconds prior to impact

    1.        Verify CCRP symbology is displayed in the HUD.
              The fire control system provides a Steering Line (SL) to provide steering to the designated target. By
              placing the Flight Path Marker (FPM) on the SL and holding down the Weapon Release Button, the
              weapon will release at the proper time and account for wind.


                  Solution Cue                                                            Gun Cross


               Target Locator Line                                                       Flight Path Marker

                     Steering Line

               Target Designator

                                                                                         Pull-Up Anticipation Cue


               Master Arm Status                                                          Slant Range
              CCRP Sub-mode
                                                                                         Time to Release




              A Solution Cue is displayed at the top of the SL. It will fall down the line as the range decreases and
              the weapons are about to be released.
              When the Target Designator (TD) is outside the HUD field on view as shown above, a Target Locator
              Line (TLL) extends from the Gun Cross pointing directly at the target. The relative angle is displayed
              next to the Gun Cross showing the number of degrees in tens between the cross and the target.
    2.        Verify TGP is configured for target search and laser fire.
              Select A-G mode on the TGP to configure it for target acquisition and weapon guidance. The line of
              sight will slave to the selected steerpoint when CCRP delivery mode is selected.
              The TGP display may be made the sensor of interest (SOI) by positioning the Display Management
              Switch (DMS) Down. The current SOI can be identified by the box surrounding the display.
                                                                                 Radar Altitude
        Current Mode

        Field of View and                                                        Situational Awareness Cue
        Zoom Factor
                                                                                 Sensor Type


                                                                                 Laser Spot Search Code

              Crosshairs



              Track Mode                                                         Laser Status




     The TGP crosshairs may then be slewed to a new position using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch.
     Slewing the Target Designator with the HUD as SOI will also slew the TGP crosshairs.
3.   Locate and designate the desired target.
     To calculate a bombing solution in CCRP mode, a target first must be designated. This can be done in
     two ways:
          •       Select a Steerpoint that was placed at the target location. The Target Designator box
                  on the HUD will be placed at the steerpoint. The TGP will slave to that location when CCRP
                  mode is selected.
          •       Locate a target with the Targeting Pod. With the TGP SOI, position the TMS Aft to
                  undesignate. The TGP will return to the boresight position near the center of the HUD. Fly
                  or slew the TGP line of sight to the desired target location. TMS Forward to designate. The
                  Target Designator box on the HUD will be placed at that location.
     Updates to the target location may be made by slewing the TD Box in the HUD or slewing the TGP
     crosshairs onto a new position with the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch. The Targeting Pod line of sight
     is used to calculate the bombing solution regardless of the track mode used.
     Command an area track with TMS Forward to stabilize the crosshairs over the target. A Point Track
     may also be commanded using TMS Forward to aid in targeting if desired.
                                                                                  Situational Awareness Cue




            Crosshairs



           Track Mode                                                             Laser Status




     Laser ranging may be performed prior to weapon release to improve the computed firing solution.
     (See Laser Ranging for more information.)
     The laser designator may be fired with any sensor type selected and from any track mode. The Laser
     status is displayed as an L near the bottom of the display when the Laser Arm switch is set to arm.
     The laser is fired by squeezing the trigger to the first detent. The L flashes when the laser designator
     is firing.
4.   Execute a CCRP bombing delivery.
     Weapons delivery for laser guided bombs is identical to unguided bomb CCRP delivery.
     Keep the Flight Path Marker aligned with the Steering Line. This will align your aircraft with the target
     even though the target will be out of sight.
     The Steering Cue will fall down the Steering Line as the range decreases and the weapon is about to
     be released. Time to release counts down at the lower right of the HUD.
         Solution Cue

                                                                                    Flight Path Marker


            Steering Line
                                                                                    Pull-Up Anticipation Cue




          Master Arm and
          Laser Status
                                                                                    Time to Release


        Target Designator




     Monitor the Pull-Up Anticipation Cue to ensure it does not go above the Flight Path Marker. The Pull-
     Up Anticipation Cue (PUAC) provides a visual representation of the altitude required for the bomb fuze
     to arm or altitude to initiate a pull-up to avoid impacting the ground, whichever is more immediate. It
     moves up toward the Flight Path Marker (FPM) as the aircraft loses altitude. Releasing a bomb with the
     FPM below the PUAC will not give the bomb time to arm and result in a dud.
5.   Press and HOLD the Weapon Release button.
     When the Solution Cue begins to move down the Steering Line, about 10 seconds prior to release,
     press and hold the Weapon Release button. This provides the fire control computer consent to release
     the weapon.
     Keep the Flight Path Marker aligned with the Steering Line. This will align your aircraft with the target
     even though the target will be out of sight.




          Solution Cue
                                                                                 Flight Path Marker



            Steering Line

                                                                                 Pull-Up Anticipation Cue




                                                                                 Time to Release
6.   Keep the Weapons Release button held until after the Solution Cue passes the Flight Path
     Marker.
     Keep flying the Flight Path Marker over the Steering Line as the Sulution Cue continues to track
     downward. The bombs are released when the Steering Cue passes the Flight Path Marker.




          Solution Cue


                                                                                   Flight Path Marker


          Steering Line




                                                                                   Time to Release




     Hold the Weapons Release button long enough to ensure all weapons come off. The FPM flashes after
     weapons are released.
     Execute a 30-45 degree check turn to the left or right to avoid overflight of the target and possible TGP
     gimbal roll. Continue to track the target in the TGP and update the crosshair aimpoint if necessary.




                                                                                  Situational Awareness Cue


             Crosshairs



            Track Mode                                                            Laser Status




7.   Lase the target with the TGP.
Squeeze the Trigger to lase the target no later than 8-12 seconds prior to impact. The L flashes when
the laser designator is firing. At impact, the screen will wash out from the IR energy of the explosion.




Switch to a wide field of view for an assessment and documentation of target damage. Set up for a re-
attack if necessary or exit the area.
JOINT DIRECT ATTACK MUNITIONS (JDAM)
JDAM is an inertial and GPS guidance kit that can be attached to the Mk-82 or Mk-84 general-purpose bombs.
When released, the aircraft downloads the target coordinates to the JDAM. The JDAM then guides to those
coordinates. The weapon is completely fire-and-forget but cannot be steered or re-targeted post-launch.


JDAM SMS Format
          Employment
          Mode                                                                          Profile Settings
                                                                                        Alignment Status
          Active Profile
                                                                                        Selected Weapon
                                                                                        and Quantity

                                                                                        Power On/Off


                                                                                        Built-In Test




                                                                                        Profile Options




                                                                                        Weapon Station




Employment Mode. Toggles between pre-planned (PRE) and visual (VIS) employment modes. (See
Employment in Pre-planned Mode and Employment in Visual Mode.)
Active Profile. Cycles between four different employment profiles. (See SMS Control Page for more information.)
Profile Settings. Press this OSB to open the Control page, where you can modify the active profile. (See SMS
Control Page for more information.)
Alignment Status. When the weapon is first powered on, will display “A10” (unstable alignment). During the
alignment process, it will count down, and then display “RDY” when alignment is complete.
Selected Weapon and Quantity. Displays the weapon quantity and “GB38” or “GB31”.
Power On/Off. Press to toggle power to all JDAM stations.
Built-In Test. Runs built-in tests. (N/I)
Profile Options. Displays the parameters of the selected profile. (See SMS Control Page for more information.)
Weapon Station. The selected weapon station for the next release is displayed in reverse video.
SMS Control Page


           Active Profile
                                                                                              Impact Angle

           Arming Delay
                                                                                             Impact Azimuth



                                                                                             Impact      Vertical
                                                                                             Velocity
           Fuzing Option




Active Profile. Cycles between four different profiles to edit.
Arming Delay. Selects the delay between weapon release and arming. Options are 4, 4.5, 5, 5.5, 6, 6.5, 7, 7.5,
8, 8.5, 9, 9.5, 10, 14, 21, and 25 seconds.
Fuzing Option. Sets the fuzing option:
     •    AIR: Weapon will air-burst above the target. This reduces the penetrative effect of the bomb but
          improves its area effect.
     •    GND: Weapon will explode on impact. Selecting GND will reveal an additional option labeled FD (fuzing
          delay). Selectable fuzing delays are 0 (instant), 5, 15, 25, 45, 60, 90, 180, and 240 milliseconds. Adding
          a fuzing delay allows the weapon to penetrate the target prior to exploding.
     •    GND DLY: Weapon will impact target inert, and then explode after an extended period. Selecting GND
          DLY will reveal an additional option labeled FD (fuzing delay). Selectable fuzing delays are 0.25, 0.5,
          0.75, 1, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 hours after impact.
Impact Angle. Sets the angle that the bomb will attempt to impact the target at (e.g., 60°). A higher impact
angle should be used if tall structures surround the target.
Impact Azimuth. Sets the heading that the bomb will attempt to fly to the target during the terminal phase. A
value of “0” means no specific heading; use a value of “360” if you want the bomb to impact the target from the
south flying north.
Impact Vertical Velocity. Sets the vertical velocity the bomb will attempt to achieve when impacting the target,
in feet per second. A higher vertical velocity creates more effective penetration.
JDAM HUD Symbology


      Azimuth
      Steering Line
                                                                                                Upper Range Scale

                                                                                                Current Range



                                                                                                In-Range Bracket


                                                                                                Lower Range Scale




                                                                                                Bearing         and
                                                                                                Distance to Target




Azimuth Steering Line. Center the Flight Path Marker over this line to fly the fastest course to the launch
acceptability region (LAR).
Upper Range Scale. Indicates the top range of the dynamic launch zone (DLZ) in nautical miles.
Current Range. The caret indicates the aircraft’s current range to the target. If the caret is within the in-range
bracket, the weapon can reach the target if released.
In-Range Bracket. Indicates the range where the weapon can reach the target.
Lower Range Scale. Indicates zero range.
Bearing and Distance to Target. Indicates the bearing (degrees) and distance (nautical miles) the current
SPI, which is the location the bomb will fly to after release.


Employment in Pre-Planned (PRE) Mode
  Summary
          1.    Select A-G Master Mode [2]
          2.    Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
          3.    Select JDAM and power on
          4.    Set desired options on SMS format
          5.    Set desired steerpoint or designate target
          6.    Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
          7.    Depress and hold Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to release at the computed point



     1.        Select JDAM and power on.
     Set the master mode to A-G, and on the SMS format, use OSB 6 to select GBU-38 (GB38) or GBU-31
     (GB31) as the active weapon. Press OSB 7 (PWR OFF) to power on the weapon and begin the alignment
     process. Alignment will take a few minutes.



                                                                                      Alignment Status

                                                                                      Selected Weapon
                                                                                      and Quantity

                                                                                      Power On/Off




2.   Set desired options on SMS format.
     On the SMS format, select and configure the profile you want to use.

        Active Profile




3.   Set desired steerpoint or designate target
     The weapon will guide to the current sensor point of interest (SPI) when released. If no cursor has
     been added, or Cursor Zero (CZ) has been pressed, the SPI will be the selected steerpoint. Designating
     a target (e.g., using the targeting pod) will shift the SPI to that location.
4.   Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
     Steer to place the azimuth steering line (ASL) over the flight path marker. Fly until the range caret is
     within the in-range bracket.
                      Azimuth
                      Steering Line
                                                                                      Dynamic   Launch
                                                                                      Zone




   5.        Depress and hold Weapons Release button
             You must hold the Weapons Release button continuously until the weapon releases. During this
             process, target coordinates and profile data is downloaded to the JDAM kit. If this process is interrupted
             by releasing the Weapons Release button before the download finishes, the weapon will become a
             hung store and will be unusable.


Employment in Visual (VIS) Mode
 Summary
        1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
        2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
        3.     Select JDAM and power on
        4.     Set VIS mode and desired options on SMS format
        5.     Use HUD and TDC to designate target
        6.     Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
        7.     Depress and hold Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to release at the computed point

   1.        Select JDAM and power on.
             Set the master mode to A-G, and on the SMS format, use OSB 6 to select GBU-38 (GB38) or GBU-31
             (GB31) as the active weapon. Press OSB 7 (PWR OFF) to power on the weapon and begin the alignment
             process. Alignment will take a few minutes.
                                                                                     Alignment Status

                                                                                     Selected Weapon
                                                                                     and Quantity

                                                                                     Power On/Off




2.   Set VIS mode and desired options on SMS format.
     On the SMS format, select and configure the profile you want to use. Press OSB 2 to change the delivery
     mode to VIS.

        Delivery Mode

        Active Profile




3.   Use HUD and TDC to designate target
     Upon enabling VIS mode, a target-designator (TD) box will appear on the HUD, and the HUD will
     become SOI. Use the TDC to slew the TD box over the target, then press TMS Forward to designate.
          HUD        SOI
          Indication




          TD Box




4.   Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
     Steer to place the azimuth steering line (ASL) over the flight path marker. Fly until the range caret is
     within the in-range bracket. You can continue to adjust the position of the TD box using the TDC.

          Azimuth
          Steering Line


          HUD        SOI
          Indication




          TD Box




5.   Depress and hold Weapons Release button
     You must hold the Weapons Release button continuously until the weapon releases. During this
     process, target coordinates and profile data is downloaded to the JDAM kit. If this process is interrupted
     by releasing the Weapons Release button before the download finishes, the weapon will become a
     hung store and will be unusable.
AGM-154 JOINT STANDOFF WEAPON
(JSOW)
JSOW is an inertially-aided glide bomb capable of striking targets up to 70 NM away, depending on the altitude
and speed of launch. When released, the aircraft downloads the target coordinates to the JSOW. The JSOW then
guides to those coordinates. The weapon is completely fire-and-forget. The AGM-154A variant has BLU-97/B
warheads and cannot be re-targeted after launch.


JSOW SMS Format
          Employment
          Mode                                                                         Profile Settings
                                                                                       Alignment Status
          Target Size
                                                                                       Selected Weapon
                                                                                       and Quantity

          Ripple setting                                                               Power On/Off


          Ripple spacing                                                               Built-In Test




                                                                                       Profile Options




                                                                                       Weapon Station




Employment Mode. Toggles between pre-planned (PRE) and visual (VIS) employment modes. (See
Employment in Pre-planned Mode and Employment in Visual Mode.)
Target Size. Not yet implemented.
Profile Settings. Press this OSB to open the Control page, where you can modify the active profile (not
implemented).
Alignment Status. When the weapon is first powered on, will display “A10” (unstable alignment). During the
alignment process, it will count down, and then display “RDY” when alignment is complete.
Selected Weapon and Quantity. Displays the weapon quantity and “A154A”.
Power On/Off. Press to toggle power to all JSOW stations.
Built-In Test. Runs built-in tests. (N/I)
Profile Settings. Displays the parameters of the selected profile. (N/I)
Weapon Station. The selected weapon station for the next release is displayed in reverse video.
Ripple setting. Toggle between single release and pairs release with longitudinal or lateral separation.
Ripple spacing: Press to enter the distance in feet between the two bombs at height of function. Not displayed
if the single release mode is selected.


JSOW HUD Symbology


      Azimuth
      Steering Line
                                                                                                Upper Range Scale

                                                                                                Current Range



                                                                                                In-Range Bracket


                                                                                                Lower Range Scale




                                                                                                Bearing         and
                                                                                                Distance to Target




Upper Range Scale. Indicates the top range of the dynamic launch zone (DLZ) in nautical miles.
Current Range. The caret indicates the aircraft’s current range to the target. If the caret is within the in-range
bracket, the weapon can reach the target if released.
In-Range Bracket. Indicates the range where the weapon can reach the target.
Lower Range Scale. Indicates zero range.
Bearing and Distance to Target. Indicates the bearing (degrees) and distance (nautical miles) the current
SPI, which is the location the bomb will fly to after release.


Employment in Pre-Planned (PRE) Mode
  Summary
       1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
       2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
       3.     Select JSOW and power on
       4.     Set desired options on SMS format
       5.     Set desired steerpoint or designate target
       6.     Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
       7.     Depress and hold Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to release at the computed point
1.   Select JSOW and power on.
     Set the master mode to A-G, and on the SMS format, use OSB 6 to select AGM-154A (A154A) as the
     active weapon. Press OSB 7 (PWR OFF) to power on the weapon and begin the alignment process.
     Alignment will take a few minutes.



                                                                                       Alignment Status

                                                                                       Selected Weapon
                                                                                       and Quantity

                                                                                       Power On/Off




2.   Set desired options on SMS format.
     On the SMS format, configure the weapon as desired.
3.   Set desired steerpoint or designate target
     The weapon will guide to the current sensor point of interest (SPI) when released. If no cursor has
     been added, or Cursor Zero (CZ) has been pressed, the SPI will be the selected steerpoint. Designating
     a target (e.g., using the targeting pod) will shift the SPI to that location.
4.   Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
     Steer to place the azimuth steering line (ASL) over the flight path marker. Fly until the range caret is
     within the in-range bracket.


              Azimuth
              Steering Line
                                                                             Dynamic   Launch
                                                                             Zone




5.   Depress and hold Weapons Release button
     You must hold the Weapons Release button continuously until the weapon releases. During this
     process, target coordinates and profile data is downloaded to the JSOW. If this process is interrupted
     by releasing the Weapons Release button before the download finishes, the weapon will become a
     hung store and will be unusable.
Employment in Visual (VIS) Mode
 Summary
        1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
        2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
        3.     Select JSOW and power on
        4.     Set VIS mode and desired options on SMS format
        5.     Use HUD and TDC to designate target
        6.     Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
        7.     Depress and hold Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to release at the computed point

   1.        Select JSOW and power on.
             Set the master mode to A-G, and on the SMS format, use OSB 6 to select AGM-154A (A154A) as the
             active weapon. Press OSB 7 (PWR OFF) to power on the weapon and begin the alignment process.
             Alignment will take a few minutes.


                                                                                      Alignment Status

                                                                                      Selected Weapon
                                                                                      and Quantity

                                                                                      Power On/Off




   2.        Set VIS mode and desired options on SMS format.
             On the SMS format, select and configure the options you want to use. Press OSB 2 to change the
             delivery mode to VIS.
               Delivery Mode
3.   Use HUD and TDC to designate target
     Upon enabling VIS mode, a target-designator (TD) box will appear on the HUD, and the HUD will
     become SOI. Use the TDC to slew the TD box over the target, then press TMS Forward to designate.

          HUD        SOI
          Indication




          TD Box




4.   Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
     Steer to place the azimuth steering line (ASL) over the flight path marker. Fly until the range caret is
     within the in-range bracket (labeled “JIZ”). You can continue to adjust the position of the TD box using
     the TDC.

          Azimuth
          Steering Line


          HUD        SOI
          Indication




          TD Box




5.   Depress and hold Weapons Release button
     You must hold the Weapons Release button continuously until the weapon releases. During this
     process, target coordinates and profile data is downloaded to the JSOW. If this process is interrupted
     by releasing the Weapons Release button before the download finishes, the weapon will become a
     hung store and will be unusable.
WIND-CORRECTED MUNITIONS
DISPENSERS (WCMD)
Wind-Corrected Munitions Dispensers (WCMD, pronounced “wick-mid”) are tail kits that can be equipped to a
CBU-87 CEM or CBU-97 SFW, giving the precision guidance capability. WCMD includes an onboard INS and can
be programmed with the winds aloft to improve accuracy.
When the CBU-87 is equipped with WCMD, it is called the CBU-103. A CBU-97 with WCMD is called a CBU-105.


WCMD SMS Format
          Employment
          Mode                                                                           Profile Settings
                                                                                         Alignment Status

                                                                                         Selected Weapon
                                                                                         and Quantity

          Ripple setting
                                                                                         Power On/Off
          Ripple spacing




                                                                                         Profile Options




                                                                                         Weapon Station




Employment Mode. Toggles between pre-planned (PRE) and visual (VIS) employment modes. (See
Employment in Pre-planned Mode and Employment in Visual Mode.)
Profile Settings. Press this OSB to open the Control page, where you can modify the active profile. (See WCMD
CNTRL Page).
Alignment Status. When the weapon is first powered on, will display “A10” (unstable alignment). During the
alignment process, it will count down, and then display “RDY” when alignment is complete.
Selected Weapon and Quantity. Displays the weapon quantity and “CB103” or “CB105”.
Power On/Off. Press to toggle power to all WCMD stations.
Profile Settings. Displays the parameters of the selected profile.
Weapon Station. The selected weapon station for the next release is displayed in reverse video.
Ripple setting. Toggle between single release and pairs release with longitudinal or lateral separation.
Ripple spacing: Press to enter the distance in feet between the two bombs at height of function. Not displayed
if the single release mode is selected.


WCMD HUD Symbology


      Azimuth
      Steering Line
                                                                                                Upper Range Scale

                                                                                                Current Range
      Release Cue


                                                                                                In-Range Bracket

                                                                                                Lower Range Scale




                                                                                                Bearing         and
                                                                                                Distance to Target




Upper Range Scale. Indicates the top range of the dynamic launch zone (DLZ) in nautical miles.
Current Range. The caret indicates the aircraft’s current range to the target. If the caret is within the in-range
bracket, the weapon can reach the target if released.
In-Range Bracket. Indicates the range where the weapon can reach the target.
Lower Range Scale. Indicates zero range.
Bearing and Distance to Target. Indicates the bearing (degrees) and distance (nautical miles) the current
SPI, which is the location the bomb will fly to after release.


WCMD CNTL Page
The CNTL page lets you configure the WCMD engagement profile and other options.
Attack Azimuth                                                                           Target Winds


                                                                                         Wind Source
Arming Delay



Burst Altitude



Spin Rate




Attack Azimuth. Sets the attack direction that the bombs will attempt to achieve. A setting of “0” means that
the bombs will use the most direct attack direction (“360” means attack heading north). (Not implemented.)
Arming Delay. Sets the delay after release before the weapon arms. (Not implemented.)
Burst Altitude. Sets the height of function, which is the altitude (MSL) when the submunitions will be released.
Higher burst altitudes create a wider dispersal.
Spin Rate. The bomb will begin rotating at this RPM value prior to submunitions release (CBU-103 only). Higher
spin rates create a wider dispersal.
Target Winds. Manual winds aloft entry. Not implemented.
Wind Source. Toggles wind data from mission planning (MP), pilot-entered (PI), and avionics system (SY).
Currently only MP is available.


Employment in Pre-Planned (PRE) Mode
  Summary
          1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
          2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
          3.     Select WCMD and power on
          4.     Set desired options on SMS format
          5.     Set desired steerpoint or designate target
          6.     Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
          7.     Depress and hold Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to release at the computed point

     1.        Select WCMD and power on.
     Set the master mode to A-G, and on the SMS format, use OSB 6 to select WCMD (CB103 or CB105) as
     the active weapon. Press OSB 7 (PWR OFF) to power on the weapon and begin the alignment process.
     Alignment will take a few minutes.


                                                                                       Alignment Status

                                                                                       Selected Weapon
                                                                                       and Quantity

                                                                                       Power On/Off




2.   Set desired options on SMS format.
     On the SMS format, configure the weapon as desired.
3.   Set desired steerpoint or designate target
     The weapon will guide to the current sensor point of interest (SPI) when released. If no cursor has
     been added, or Cursor Zero (CZ) has been pressed, the SPI will be the selected steerpoint. Designating
     a target (e.g., using the targeting pod) will shift the SPI to that location.
4.   Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
     Steer to place the azimuth steering line (ASL) over the flight path marker. Fly until the range caret is
     within the in-range bracket.


              Azimuth
              Steering Line
                                                                             Dynamic   Launch
                                                                             Zone




5.   Depress and hold Weapons Release button
     You must hold the Weapons Release button continuously until the weapon releases. During this
     process, target coordinates and profile data is downloaded to the WCMD. If this process is interrupted
     by releasing the Weapons Release button before the download finishes, the weapon will become a
     hung store and will be unusable.
Employment in Visual (VIS) Mode
 Summary
        1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2]
        2.     Set Master Arm Switch to Arm
        3.     Select WCMD and power on
        4.     Set VIS mode and desired options on SMS format
        5.     Use HUD and TDC to designate target
        6.     Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
        7.     Depress and hold Weapons Release button [RAlt]+[Space] to release at the computed point

   1.        Select WCMD and power on.
             Set the master mode to A-G, and on the SMS format, use OSB 6 to select WCMD (CB103 and CB105)
             as the active weapon. Press OSB 7 (PWR OFF) to power on the weapon and begin the alignment
             process. Alignment will take a few minutes.


                                                                                      Alignment Status

                                                                                      Selected Weapon
                                                                                      and Quantity

                                                                                      Power On/Off




   2.        Set VIS mode and desired options on SMS format.
             On the SMS format, select and configure the options you want to use. Press OSB 2 to change the
             delivery mode to VIS.
               Delivery Mode
3.   Use HUD and TDC to designate target
     Upon enabling VIS mode, a target-designator (TD) box will appear on the HUD, and the HUD will
     become SOI. Use the TDC to slew the TD box over the target, then press TMS Forward to designate.

          HUD        SOI
          Indication




          TD Box




4.   Center FPM on Steering Line and fly in range
     Steer to place the azimuth steering line (ASL) over the flight path marker. Fly until the range caret is
     within the in-range bracket. You can continue to adjust the position of the TD box using the TDC.

          Azimuth
          Steering Line


          HUD        SOI
          Indication




          TD Box




5.   Depress and hold Weapons Release button
     You must hold the Weapons Release button continuously until the weapon releases. During this
     process, target coordinates and profile data is downloaded to the WCMD. If this process is interrupted
     by releasing the Weapons Release button before the download finishes, the weapon will become a
     hung store and will be unusable.
AGM-88 HARM
The AGM-88C High-speed Anti-Radiation Missile (HARM) is a supersonic, passive radar-guided air-to-ground
missile intended to strike air defense radar sites and vehicles. The missile has an onboard radar receiver that
homes in on radar energy emitted by ground-based radars, making it fire-and-forget. The pilot can designate
targets using the missile’s onboard radar receiver or using the HARM Targeting System (HTS) external sensor
pod. The HARM may be loaded on stations 3, 4, 6, or 7, but is typically only employed from stations 3 and 7.
The HARM can be targeted using one of three modes: position known (POS), HARM-as-sensor (HAS), or datalink
(DL). Currently, DL is not implemented in DCS.
Communication with the HARM missile is managed by the aircraft launcher interface computer (ALIC) within the
LAU-118 missile launcher. The ALIC provides HARM sensor video to the SMS and allows the SMS to hand off
threat types to the AGM-88. After launch, the AGM-88 will home on threat radars matching the handed-off threat
type.


Preparation
Prior to departure, set up your HARM threat tables as necessary. The threats you expect to fire against must be
present on the selected threat table for the AGM-88 to detect them. Most of the time, you will be able to use one
of the default threat tables:
         TBL1                                  TBL2                                  TBL3
 WPN                                   WPN                                  WPN
         (MODERN SAM SYSTEMS)                  (AAA & SHORAD)                        (OLDER SAM SYSTEMS )
   10    SA-10 “FLAP LID”               19     SA-19 “HOT SHOT”                3     SA-3 “LOW BLOW”
   BB    SA-10 “BIG BIRD”               15     SA-15 “SCRUM HALF”              S     P-19 “FLAT FACE”
   CS    SA-10 “CLAM SHELL”              8     SA-8 “LAND ROLL”                6     SA-6 “STRAIGHT FLUSH”
   11    SA-11 “FIRE DOME”               A     ZSU-23-4 “GUN DISH”             2     SA-2 “FAN SONG”
   SD    SA-11 “SNOW DRIFT”             DE     PPRU-M1 “DOG EAR”              13     SA-13 “SNAP SHOT”


If any expected threats do not appear on these tables, you will need to edit one or more of the tables. It may be
wise to consolidate the expected threats to one table to improve the efficiency of employing HARM missiles during
the mission.
The HARM DED page is used to edit the default HARM threat tables.
HARM DED Page
The HARM DED page is accessed by pressing 0/M-SEL on the ICP keypad when the MISC DED page is displayed
on the DED, or by pressing UFC (OSB 5) on the MFD Weapon (WPN) format, when “AG88” is the current SMS
profile. This page is used to configure the HARM threat tables to better tailor the AGM-88 scans to the radar
signals that are anticipated to be encountered during the mission.
(See Appendix B for a complete list of all threat radar ALIC codes.)


            1. HARM Threat Table                                                                      4. DED Asterisks

          2. Table Threat Number                                                                      3. Threat ALIC Code




                                                                                           Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                            Cycle to next threat table                   the previous data field


                                   Reject
                                                                             Return DED                              No function
                                   Accept                                    to CNI page




                         Operate            Cycle to previous threat table                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                           to the next data field


1.   HARM Threat Table. Displays the HARM threat table that corresponds with the displayed threat ALIC
     codes. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different threat table.
2.   Table Threat Number. Displays five threat entries that may accept an ALIC code for the displayed threat
     table.
3.   Threat ALIC Code. Displays the ALIC code representing a specific threat radar type that is loaded into the
     corresponding threat entry. May be modified using the ICP keypad.
4.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
SMS Format
Prior to employing HARMs, press the A-G button on the ICP to select air-to-ground master mode. Ensure that the
SMS and WPN formats are visible on an MFD. From the SMS format, power on the HARMs:




   Master mode                                                                              Inventory


                                                                                            Weapon type

                                                                                            Weapon status

                                                                                            AGM-88 power

                                                                                            BIT
       Station




 Weapon status




Master mode: Toggles between A-G and STRF (gun strafe) air-to-ground modes.
Inventory: Pressing this OSB displays the Inventory page.
Weapon type: Displays “AG88” for AGM-88 HARM, and the number of missiles loaded.
Weapon status: Displays “RDY” when the AGM-88 is ready for launch.
AGM-88 power: Displays “PWR ON” or “PWR OFF”. Pressing commands spin-up or spin-down to all loaded
AGM-88 missiles.
BIT: Commands execution of a built-in test. The status of each station will be updated following completion of
the BIT.
Station: Displays the stations on which HARMs are loaded. The station selected for launch is boxed. Above the
station number is a character indicating the missile degrade state for that station: “D” for degraded or “F” for
failed. No character above the station number indicates a functioning missile.
WPN Format
The AGM-88 HARM can be targeted using its onboard sensor in one of three modes: position known (POS),
HARM-as-sensor (HAS), or datalink (DL). (Currently DL is not supported in DCS.) Each mode has its own WPN
format.


HAS Mode
                                                                                                     Search filter
          FOV

  Threat table                                                                                       HARM UFC

  Sub-mode                                                                                           DTSB

  Threat types                                                                                       Scan counter
     Scan time

                                                                                                     Restart search

     Boresight                                                                                       ALIC video
     time
          TDC




        Station




Sub-mode: Displays “HAS” in HARM-as-Sensor sub-mode.
Threat table: Displays the current threat table (TBL1, TBL2, or TBL3). Pressing cycles through the three tables.
Pressing TMS Left when the WPN page is SOI also cycles through threat tables.
FOV: Displays the missile field of view: “CTR” for center, “LT” for left, “RT” for right, and “WIDE” for wide.
Pressing cycles through FOV settings. The FOV setting controls which portion of the missile’s forward hemisphere
it searches. Pressing the Expand/FOV button on the SSC also cycles FOV settings.
Search filter: Pressing this OSB allows the pilot to toggle on and off threats within the current threat table.
Reducing the number of threats that the ALIC is searching for reduces the time for each scan cycle.
HARM UFC: Pressing this OSB displays the HARM page on the DED, where threat tables can be modified.
DTSB: The detected target status box lists detected threat types. When a new threat is detected, its type (e.g.,
“2” for SA-2) is added to the DTSB.
Scan counter: This counter increments after each successive scan made by the AGM-88.
Restart search: Pressing this OSB cancels the current scan cycle and begins a new one.
ALIC video: Detected threats are displayed in this area. Only threats from the active threat table are displayed.
ALIC video is ground stabilized and referenced to missile boresight line. Threats displayed as characters
representing their type (e.g., “2” for SA-2). If the threat is active (radiating), the letter “A” follows the threat
type. If the threat is tracking (guiding an in-flight missile), the letter “T” follows the threat type. If the threat is
not radiating (memory threat), or multiple threats of the same time are co-located, no “A” or “T” is shown.
Pressing TMS Forward commands designation of the threat under the TDC. The ALIC video display will switch to
a non-ground-stabilized display of the targeted threat, with crosshairs indicating missile boresight.




Station: Shows which stations have AGM-88s loaded. The station selected for next launch is boxed. A “D” or “F”
is displayed over the station number to indicate a degraded or failed missile.
TDC: The target designator cursor is slewed over a target the pilot wishes to designate, using the RDR
CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip. Pressing TMS Forward commands designation of the threat under
the TDC, and hands off the threat type to the AGM-88.
Boresight: Indicates the missile boresight axis.
Scan time: Shows worst-case scan time. The ALIC will repeatedly scan for threats according to the chosen
parameters. Reducing the number of threats to be scanned using the SRCH OSB, or reducing the FOV, will reduce
the scan time and therefore decrease the amount of time before a threat is detected.
Threat types: The five threat types for the current threat table (TBL1, TBL2, or TBL3) are shown along the left
side. If a threat is designated, its type is highlighted. The adjacent OSBs have no function in the HAS sub-mode.
POS Mode


        POS mode

      Threat table                                                                                  HARM UFC

      Sub-mode



      Threat types

     In-flight missile
     data
                                                                                                    Next missile
                                                                                                    data

 Launch         status
 divider line



                                                                                                    Station




Sub-mode: Displays “POS” in Position Known sub-mode.
Threat table: Displays the current threat table (TBL1, TBL2, or TBL3). Pressing cycles through the three tables.
Pressing TMS Left when the WPN page is SOI also cycles through threat tables.
HARM UFC: Pressing this OSB displays the HARM page on the DED, where threat tables can be modified.
POS mode: Selects the attack profile to use: EOM (equations of motion), PB (pre-briefed), or RUK (range
unknown).
Threat types: Lists the threats in the current table. Pressing the OSB adjacent to a threat hands off that threat
type to the ALIC.
Next missile data: Information about the next missile to be launched. Not displayed if all missiles have been
launched. Line 1 is the threat type to be handed off to the missile. Line 2 is the steerpoint to be handed off to
the missile. Line 3 is the predicted time until impact, and line 4 is the predicted impact time, if the missile were
launched now. Only lines 1 and 2 are shown for RUK attacks.
In-flight missile data: Information about the in-flight missile. If multiple missiles are in-flight, multiple
datablocks will be shown along this row. Line 1 is the predicted time until impact. Line 2 is the steerpoint that
was handed off to the missile, and line 3 is the threat type that was handed off to the missile. Only lines 2 and 3
are shown for RUK attacks.
Launch status divider line (LSDL): Divides in-flight missile information from next missile information.
HUD Symbology



                                                                                                    Upper          range
                                                                                                    scale

                                                                                                    AMZ/MMZ
    Max loft
                                                                                                    separator

                                                                                                    Current         range,
                                                                                                    required loft angle

    FOV box                                                                                         HLS

   A-G mode                                                                                         Release altitude
                                                                                                    and required turn

                                                                                                    Time to MMZ


   Min loft




   Optimal                                                                                          Current         range,
   loft                                                                                             required loft angle




                                                                                                    Bearing       and
                                                                                                    distance to target




On the right side is the HARM Launch Scale (HLS), which indicates the range potential of the missile to reach the
current target. The target is assumed to be at the selected steerpoint. The SMS estimates both the aircraft
maneuver zone (AMZ), and the missile maneuver zone (MMZ). The AMZ is the zone where the missile can reach
the target if the launching aircraft lofts or turns towards the target first. The MMZ is the zone where the missile
can reach the target by doing entirely its own maneuvering.
FOV box: Indicates the end-game field-of-view of the HARM. The FOV box flashes when the aircraft is within
the missile maneuver zone, target handoff is completed, and the missile is ready to be fired.
HLS: The HARM launch scale (HLS) staple represents the combined AMZ and MMZ; in other words, the ranges
at which the missile can reach the target with or without aircraft maneuvering. The horizontal dash within the
staple indicates the top of the MMZ range and the bottom of the AMZ range. The bottom of the staple indicates
minimum launch distance. The pickle button is only hot when the staple is within the MMZ.
The HLS and all associated symbology are inhibited in HAS mode.
Current range, required loft angle: The position of the caret along the staple represents the current aircraft
range to target along the HLS range scale. If the caret is above the AMZ/MMZ separator, the aircraft must first
maneuver before the missile can reach the target. The number adjacent to the caret is the required loft angle to
place the aircraft within the MMZ. The loft angle is prefixed by an “A” when the aircraft is within the MMZ. The
caret is inhibited when in PB mode and more than 10° off-bearing.
Upper range scale: Will be either 40 or 80 NM, whichever is sufficient to cover the distance to the target.
Zero range: The bottom end of the HLS is a target distance of zero.
Min loft, optimal loft, max loft: The horizontal ticks along the azimuth steering line (ASL) indicate the
minimum and maximum loft required for the missile to reach the target. Maximum loft is the larger tick and
represents the loft angle that will give the missile maximum range. Minimum loft is the smaller tick and represents
the range where the missile would have to do a max-g pulldown to reach the target. In PB mode, optimal loft is
also shown as a pair of whiskers along the ASL. Optimal loft represents the loft angle that gives the missile the
maximum energy available at impact.
Loft cues are inhibited in HAS and POS/RUK modes.
Release altitude: The top number of this datablock is the predicted release altitude assuming the aircraft makes
a 4-g loft to the optimal loft altitude (or the maximum loft altitude if not within the MMZ).
Required turn: The bottom number of this datablock is the required turn to place the aircraft within the MMZ
(e.g., “L03” if a 3° left turn is required). Shows “00” if the aircraft is on-bearing but not yet within the MMZ range.
Once the aircraft is within the MMZ, this field shows the aircraft required turn to face the target (e.g., “L90” if
the aircraft nose is 90° right of the target).
This datablock is not displayed in HAS and POS/RUK modes.
Time to MMZ: Displays the estimated time until the aircraft reaches the MMZ. Displays “0:00” when the aircraft
is inside the MMZ. Not displayed in HAS or POS/RUK modes.
Bearing and distance to target: The bearing and distance (in nautical miles) from the aircraft’s present
position to the target. Not displayed in HAS mode.


Employment using HARM-as-Sensor (HAS) Mode
  Summary
       1.    Select A-G Master Mode [2].
       2.    Set MASTER ARM switch to ARM.
       3.    Select AG88 on SMS page (OSB6).
       4.    Select HAS sub-mode on the WPN page (OSB1).
       5.    Make the WPN page SOI.
       6.    Select the desired threat table on the WPN page (OSB2).
       7.    Wait until your threat appears in the ALIC video display on the WPN page.
       8.    Move the WPN cursor over the threat and designate with TMS Forward [RCtrl]+[Up].
       9.    Fire the missile using the Weapon Release button [RAlt]+[Space].

HARM-as-sensor (HAS) mode is a target-of-opportunity employment mode using the HARM’s onboard radar
receiver. The HARM detects air defense radar signals and transmits that information to the aircraft. The pilot can
then select a radar to attack and launch a HARM against it. With this mode, distance to the target is not known,
only bearing, so the HARM does not loft, which decreases its effective range.
In HAS mode, the HARM repeatedly scans for threats that match the current active threat table. The HARM begins
with a full scan of its FOV, once for each of the selected threat types. If any targets are found, a detailed scan is
performed to determine the target coordinates. The HARM then steps to the next threat type. In all, this results
in a worst-case scan cycle time of 90 seconds.
The ALIC is in HAS mode when the master mode is A-G, AG88 is the selected weapon on the SMS page, and
“HAS” is displayed as the active sub-mode on the WPN page.
     1.   Select HAS mode and make WPN page SOI.
          Press OSB 1 if necessary to change to HAS sub-mode. Ensure that the WPN page is SOI; if not, press
          DMS Aft-Short to change SOI to the WPN page.




     2.   Select the appropriate threat table.
          Press OSB 2 or TMS Left until the desired threat table is selected.
     3.   Reduce the scan time by selecting only the threats you wish to scan for (optional).
          If you want to reduce scan time, press SRCH (OSB 4), then leave highlighted only the threats you are
          interested in searching for.




          Press HAS (OSB 1) to return to the HAS page.
     4.   Select an FOV (optional).
     You can further reduce scan time by using the Expand/FOV button (or OSB 3) to cycle through FOV
     options until you find an appropriate FOV.
5.   Locate and designate your target.
     Point your aircraft (and the missile seeker) in the direction of your expected threat. As each scan cycle
     completes, detected threats will be shown in the ALIC video area and placed into the DTSB.




     Slew the cursor over the detected threat, then press TMS Forward to designate it. The HAS display will
     change to indicate the designated threat.




     Note that you can designate and fire against any threat that appears on the HAS display, but many
     radar operators will cycle their radars on and off or track different targets. This will result in the HARM
     being unable to continue tracking the target, and the missile will become ineffective.
     To increase probability of kill, you may wish to wait until the threat radar is guiding a missile at you
     (“T” appears next to threat type on HAS display) before firing, since a radar operator is less likely to
     cease tracking you while guiding a missile. However, this strategy comes with its own obvious risks!
6.   Fire the missile.
Verify the proper threat is highlighted, “RDY” is displayed in the SMS and WPN pages, and the FOV box
in the HUD is flashing, then press and hold the pickle button to fire the missile.
Employment using Position Known (POS) Mode
  Summary
          1.     Select A-G Master Mode [2].
          2.     Set MASTER ARM switch to ARM.
          3.     Select AG88 on SMS page (OSB6).
          4.     Select POS sub-mode on the WPN page (OSB1).
          5.     Select the attack profile on the WPN page (OSB3).
          6.     Select the desired threat table and threat on the WPN page (OSB2).
          7.     Select the target steerpoint.
          8.     Fly to the AMZ, follow the loft and turn cues, and wait until the FOV box on the HUD is flashing.
          9.     Fire the missile using the Weapon Release button [RAlt]+[Space].

Position Known (POS) mode is a pre-planned employment mode that relies on a steerpoint being placed at or
near the target radar. The radar type will be downloaded to the ALIC, and the HARM will fly towards the target
steerpoint until the radar is detected, at which point it will home on the radar signal.
In POS mode, the pilot selects one of three attack profiles: Equations of Motion (EOM), Pre-Briefed (PB), or Range
Unknown (RUK). Each of these profiles makes different assumptions about the aircraft maneuver zone (AMZ) and
missile maneuver zone (MMZ). The AMZ is the zone where the missile can reach the target, assuming the aircraft
maneuvers to a required bearing and loft angle first. The MMZ is the zone where the missile can reach the target
without requiring the aircraft to turn or loft.
Equations of Motion (EOM) mode is the most effective profile for off-boresight launches but requires the most
accurate target steerpoint data. To launch with EOM selected, the pilot must first fly to the AMZ, then loft and
launch once within the MMZ. EOM is useful when attacking threats that require high-angle off-boresight (HOB)
defensive tactics.
Pre-Briefed (PB) mode is the most effective profile at longer ranges but requires an on-bearing attack. To
launch with PB selected, the pilot must first turn the aircraft to point at the target, then fly to the AMZ, then loft
and launch once within the MMZ. PB is most effective at longer ranges but requires the aircraft to fly directly at
the target.
Range Unknown (RUK) mode is the most versatile profile when working with degraded target data. To launch
with RUK selected, the pilot must fly the aircraft into the MMZ, where the missile can make all required
maneuvering to reach the target. RUK is much more tolerant of inaccurate target steerpoints, or when fighting
threats where only bearing information is available.
     1.        Select POS sub-mode on the WPN page.
               Press OSB 1 if necessary to change to POS sub-mode. You will see the launch status divider line (LSDL)
               and next-launch information below the LSDL.
   2.   Select the attack profile.
        On the WPN page, press OSB 3 until the desired attack profile is shown.
   3.   Select the threat table and threat.
        On the WPN page. press OSB 2 until the desired threat table is shown, and then press the OSB adjacent
        to the threat you wish to attack from the list on the left side. This will hand off the threat to the ALIC.
   4.   Select the target steerpoint.
        Activate the steerpoint co-located with the threat you are attacking.
   5.   Fly to the AMZ, follow the required turn and loft cues, and wait until the FOV box on the
        HUD is flashing.
        The attack profile you will fly is dependent on whether you have selected EOM, PB, or RUK.


EOM Attacks
        In EOM mode, you can launch from any relative bearing, as long as you follow the cues to the MMZ.
        First fly towards the target until the HLS range caret indicates that you are within the AMZ. If a required
        turn is indicated on the datablock below the HLS, turn as indicated until it reads “00”. (You do not
        necessarily need to be facing the target, as long as there is no required turn.) Then, pull up until the
        VVI is between the minimum and maximum loft cues on the ASL. When the FOV box is flashing, you
        can launch.


PB Attacks
        In PB mode, you must be within 10° of bearing to the target. Once your aircraft is pointed towards the
        target, fly towards the target until within the AMZ. You will see the minimum, optimal, and maximum
        loft cues on the ASL. Pitch the aircraft to place the VVI between the minimum and maximum loft cues.
        When the FOV box is flashing, you can launch.


RUK Attacks
        In RUK mode, you must fly the aircraft all the way to the MMZ. Follow the azimuth steering line (ASL)
        on the HUD towards the target until the FOV box on the HUD is flashing. Once it is flashing, you are
within the MMZ and the weapon release button will be hot. For RUK attacks, the HARM will loft, but
the loft angle will be limited to the maximum the missile can achieve while keeping the threat within
its field of view.
Because range information is degraded or unavailable for RUK attacks, no time-until-intercept or time-
to-impact data is shown on the WPN page, and loft information is suppressed on the HUD.
AGM-65 MAVERICK
The AGM-65 Maverick is an optically guided air-to-ground missile intended for the close air support (CAS) mission.
It uses an onboard electro-optical (E/O) or infrared imager that tracks the target, giving it “fire and forget”
capability. The pilot locks the target using the image from the onboard seeker head and fires the missile. The
missile tracks to the target using the image from its seeker head.
The AGM-65 was developed by Hughes Missile Systems Division in 1966 and entered service in 1972.


Operation
The AGM-65 must be warmed up before it can be used. During the warm-up period, onboard image-stabilizing
gyroscopes spin up to operating speed. The missile’s video can be used before the gyroscopes have spun up, but
the image will not be ground stabilized.
Missile video will become available on the WPN page once the gyroscopes are spun up. If you wish to shorten
the warm-up period, pressing the Uncage button while the WPN page is SOI will activate missile video once the
gyroscopes have reached 90% of operating speed.
The pilot can locate and designate targets using the fire control radar (FCR) or heads-up display (HUD), using
the AGM-65’s own seeker head, or the pilot can handoff targets designated from the Sniper Advanced Targeting
Pod (TGP).
When handing off targets from the TGP, the missile boresight correlator (MBC) compares the image from the
targeting pod with the image from the missile seeker head and slews the missile seeker head until the images
match. The MBC is only active when in A/G mode with an AGM-65 selected, and the TGP is sensor of interest
(SOI).
When the Maverick is fired, its onboard imager continues to track the target until the target grows to fill about
75% of the seeker head field of view (FOV). At this point, to continue to impact, the Maverick uses forced
correlation.
The AGM-65 has a ground-configurable fuzing delay and a ground-selectable LAND/SHIP selector that changes
the tracking algorithm to be more suitable for vehicles or ships.


Limitations
 Standby           1 hour
 time

 Video time        30 minutes

 Seeker gimbal limits

    AGM-65D        ±42°                                                                             horizontally
                   ±30-54° vertically
 SMS Page


   E/O sub-mode                                                                               Inventory

SMS master mode                                                                               Control menu
mode
                                                                                              Missile quantity and type



     Missile step                                                                             Power on/off


                                                                                              Release pulses




                                                                                              Station




 SMS master mode: Toggles between A-G and STRF (gun strafe) master modes.
 E/O sub-mode: Cycles between PRE, VIS, or BORE E/O sub-modes. You can also toggle sub-modes by
 depressing the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip. (See Employment sections below for more
 information.)
 Inventory page: Press to show the Inventory page.
 Control page: Press to show the Control page.
 Missile quantity and type: Cycles between different types of loaded AGM-65s.
 Auto power toggle: Toggles on or off the auto-power feature (See Automatic Power-On below for more
 information.)
 Release pulses: Controls the number of missiles released per press of the weapon release button. Only available
 for AGM-65D and -65G.
 Stations: Shows the stations loaded with AGM-65s. The next station to fire is highlighted.
 Missile step: Cycles the next station to fire between loaded stations.


 SMS Page, CNTL Sub-Page
 Auto power toggle: Turns on or off the auto power-on feature.
 Auto power steerpoint: Sets the steerpoint where the Maverick will automatically turn on.
 Auto power direction: Sets the general direction the airplane must be going when it crosses that steerpoint to
 automatically power on the Mavericks. Cycles between north/east/south/west.
    WPN Page


     E/O sub-mode
   Operating mode                                                                              Field of view


    TGP boresight                                                                              Weapon type and quantity

                                                                                               Expand FOV
    Tracking gate
                                                                                               Polarity
    Pointer cross
                                                                                                    LAR
                                                                                               Max range
Reticle depressions
                                                                                               Current range
                                                                                               Min range
           Stations                                                                            Zero range

                                                                                               TTI
    Weapon status




    Operating mode: Cycles between STBY (standby) and OPER (operating) modes.

    E/O sub-mode: Cycles between PRE, VIS, or BORE E/O sub-modes. You can also toggle sub-modes by
    depressing the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip. (See Employment sections below for more
    information.)

    TGP boresight: Press to mark this Maverick station as boresighted to the targeting pod. This should be done
    after confirming that the targeting pod and Maverick seeker head are pointing at the same target.
    (See Missile Boresighting more information.)

    Tracking gate: Indicates the missile track target. The crosshairs will expand to indicate the boundaries of the
    target being tracked.

    Pointer cross: Indicates the seeker head direction relative to boresight (center of the screen). The AGM-65D
    seeker head is capable of ±42° horizontally, and +30–54° vertically.

    The pointer cross will flash when any of the following launch criteria are not met.

          •         Seeker head must be within 10° horizontally and vertically of boresight.
          •         Target image must be large enough to maintain continuous track.
    Reticle depressions: Indicates 5°, 10°, and 15° of reticle depression.

    Stations: Shows the stations loaded with AGM-65s. The next station to fire is highlighted. Above the station
    number will be a character indicating the status of the Missile Boresight Correlator:

          •         S: Slave (MBC has not been commanded to slew missile)
          •         1: Slew 1 (MBC is slewing to match missile LOS to TGP LOS)
          •         2: Slew 2 (MBC is slewing to match missile video to TGP video)
          •         T: Track (MBC has commanded missile to track)
          •         C: Complete (MBC has finished correlating)
          •         I: Impossible (MBC was unable to complete handoff)
Weapon status: One of the following.

     •    REL: Release signal being transmitted to weapon.
     •    RDY: Weapon is armed and ready for release.
     •    MAL: Weapon cannot be released due to malfunction.
     •    SIM: Weapon is unarmed and will not be released, but release symbology is being displayed.
     •    (blank): MASTER ARM is in OFF position.
Field of view: Toggles between wide and narrow FOV. You can also toggle FOV using the Expand/FOV button
on the Side Stick Controller (SSC) when the WPN format is SOI, or using the Un-cage function on the
MANRNG/UNCAGE knob regardless of SOI.

Weapon type: Cycles between the different types of loaded AGM-65s. Shows the quantity and type of AGM-65
loaded and active.

Expand FOV: Outlines the boundaries of the expanded field of view.

Polarity: Toggles between hot-on-cold (HOC) and cold-on-hot (COH) polarity. You can also press TMS Right to
toggle between polarities. The AGM-65G and -H additionally have an AREA mode for forced correlation mode.
(See Force Correlate below for more information.)

LAR: The launch acceptable region for the next missile, showing the acceptable launch range and current range
adjacent to the caret. Accurate range data is only available if the SPI is in proximity to the missile LOS.

Time to impact (TTI): The time until the next missile impacts its target, if launched now.
Preparation
The AGM-65 has a duty cycle of one hour in standby, and 30 minutes when active. After powering the
AGM-65s, the missiles will begin their 3-minute warm-up period. Once three minutes has passed, the missiles are
in standby mode and ready for employment. In standby mode, the missiles have one hour of available duty time.
Once a missile’s video is activated, it has 30 minutes of available duty time. When a missile’s duty time has
expired, it must be powered off for two hours.


Automatic Power-On
The SMS can be configured to automatically power on the Mavericks when crossing a configured steerpoint, so
that the pilot does not need to remember to power them on at least three minutes prior to employment.

  Summary
          1.     On the SMS format, select Mavericks.
          2.     Display the Control page.
          3.     Choose the steerpoint.
          4.     Choose the direction and enable auto power-on.

     1.        On the SMS format, select Mavericks.
               On the SMS format, press OSB 6 until AG65 is shown as the active weapon.




     2.        Display the Control page.
               Press the CNTL (OSB 5) to display the Control page.
3.   Choose the steerpoint.
     Press OSB 19, labeled STPT X.




     Using the OSBs, enter the steerpoint number, then press the OSB labeled ENTR. The Mavericks will be
     powered on upon crossing this steerpoint. You can press RCL to undo an errant digit, or RTN to return
     to the Control page without changing the steerpoint number.
4.   Choose the direction and enable auto power-on.
     Press OSB 20 (NORTH OF) to cycle between different direction options. The Maverick will not be
     powered on until the aircraft crosses the configured steerpoint traveling in generally this direction.
     Press AUTO PWR (OSB 7) to turn on the automatic power-on feature.
You can leave the Control page by pressing the CNTL (OSB 5) again.
Missile Boresighting
Missile boresighting should be done prior to employing Mavericks using TGP handoff. It can be done either on
the ground or in the air while enroute.

  Summary
         1.     Power on the Mavericks and TGP.
         2.     Set GND JETT switch to ENABLE, MASTER ARM switch to MASTER ARM or SIMULATE, A-G master
                mode [2], and TGP to A-G mode.
         3.     On the SMS format, select AG65 and set E/O sub-mode to PRE or VIS.
         4.     On the TGP format, slew the seeker head to the boresight target.
         5.     On the WPN format, slew the seeker head to the same target and designate.
         6.     Press the BSGT button (OSB 20).
         7.     Repeat steps 4–6 for each station.
         8.     Power off the Mavericks and reset all switches.

    1.        Power on the Mavericks and TGP.
              Place the TGP format on one MFD, and the SMS format on another.
              If the Mavericks are not already powered on: On the SMS format, press the PWR OFF (OSB 7) to power
              on the Mavericks.




              If the TGP is not already powered on: Set the RIGHT HDPT power switch to on, on the SENSOR panel.
    2.        Set GND JETT ENABLE ON, MASTER ARM SIM, A-G master mode, and A/G TGP mode.
              If on the ground, set GND JETT ENABLE to ON. Press the A-G button on the ICP to switch to air-to-
              ground master mode. Set the MASTER ARM switch to SIM.
              If the TGP is not already in air-to-ground mode, then on the TGP format, press the OSB labeled STBY,
              then the OSB labeled A-G to put the targeting pod in A/G mode.
    3.        On the SMS format, select AG65 and set E/O sub-mode to PRE or VIS.
              On the SMS format, press OSB 2 until PRE or VIS is shown as the Maverick sub-mode. (You can also
              depress the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip to cycle between delivery modes.) Use
              PRE if your boresight target is co-located with a steerpoint; use VIS if you are visually locating your
              boresight target. Confirm that AGM-65 PRE or VIS symbology is shown on the HUD. Choosing a target
              further away will reduce parallax errors.
     Change the MFD displaying the SMS format to the WPN format. On the WPN format, verify that NOT
     TIMED OUT is no longer displayed, indicating the missiles have completed their three-minute warm-
     up. The WPN page should begin displaying video from the missile seeker head.
4.   On the TGP format, slew the seeker head to the boresight target.
     Use DMS Aft-Short to move SOI to the TGP. Using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch, slew the TGP
     pointing cross over the boresight target.




5.   On the WPN format, slew the seeker head to the same target and designate.
     Press DMS Aft-Short until SOI moves to the WPN format. Use the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch to slew
     the Maverick tracking gate over that same boresight target, then press TMS Forward to designate.
     Verify that the tracking gate closes, and the correct target is being tracked.




6.   Press the BSGT button (OSB 20).
     Press OSB 20, labeled BSGT, to boresight the missiles.
     Press TMS Aft to break missile track, then verify the missile LOS follows the TGP LOS.
7.   Repeat steps 4–6 for each station.
     Press the Missile Step button to move to the next pylon. Repeat this procedure for each pylon loaded
     with AGM-65s.
8.   Power off the Mavericks and reset all switches.
     When you are finished boresighting your missiles, go back to the SMS format and press the OSB labeled
     PWR ON. This will prevent your Mavericks from running through their duty time before you enter the
     combat area.
     Be sure to reset the positions of the MASTER ARM and GND JETT ENABLE switches, as well as the
     master mode.
Employment using PRE mode
The PRE (pre-planned) delivery mode allows you to lock targets in the vicinity of a sensor point of interest (SPI),
such as a steerpoint. PRE uses CCRP-style HUD symbology, and the Maverick seeker head will be slaved to the
SPI.

  Summary
          1.     On the WPN format, set E/O sub-mode to PRE. Make sure WPN page is SOI.
          2.     Slew the tracking gate over the target and designate [RCtrl]+[Up].
          3.     Fire the missile [RAlt]+[Space].

     1.        On the WPN format, set E/O sub-mode to PRE. Make sure WPN page is SOI.
               On the WPN format, set the delivery mode to PRE by depressing the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch or
               OSB 2. The Maverick seeker head will be slaved to the SPI (typically the selected steerpoint). Confirm
               that seeker head video is available.




               Press DMS Aft-Short until the WPN page is SOI.
     2.        Slew the tracking gate over the target and designate.
               Use the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch to slew the tracking gate over the target, then press TMS Forward
               to designate. The tracking gate will close on the target. Confirm that the missile is tracking the correct
               target, the pointer cross is not flashing, and that the target is in range.
3.   Fire the missile.
     Fire the missile with the Weapon Release button.
Employment using VIS mode
The VIS (visual) delivery mode allows you to lock targets that you can see in front of you, by using the HUD to
slew a TD box onto the target. VIS uses DTOS-style sighting. VIS mode is unavailable if the Mavericks are loaded
onto an LAU-88/A rack.

  Summary
          1.     On the WPN format, set E/O sub-mode to VIS.
          2.     On the HUD, slew the TD box over the target and designate [RCtrl]+[Up] twice.
          3.     On the WPN format, slew the tracking gate over the target and designate [RCtrl]+[Up].
          4.     Fire the missile [RAlt]+[Space].
          5.
     1.        On the WPN format, set E/O sub-mode to PRE.
               On the WPN format, set the delivery mode to VIS by depressing the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch or
               OSB 2. SOI will move to the HUD, and a TD box will appear initially caged to the flight path marker
               (FPM). Confirm that seeker head video is available on the WPN page.




     2.        On the HUD, slew the TD box over the target and designate.
               Slew the TD Box using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip. Press TMS Forward to
               ground-stabilize the TD Box.
               Refine the TD Box location as necessary using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch on the throttle grip.
               Press TMS Forward to designate the location and the SOI will move to the WPN format.
     If necessary, reject the designation by setting HUD as SOI using DMS Forward, and then TMS Aft-
     Short.
3.   On the WPN format, slew the tracking gate over the target and designate.
     Use TMS Left or OSB 7 to change video polarity, if desired.
     Use the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch to place the target within the crosshairs on the WPN format,
     then press TMS Forward to track the target. The crosshairs will close on the target. Confirm that the
     missile is tracking the correct target, the pointer cross is not flashing, and that the target is in range.




4.   Fire the missile.
     Fire the missile with the Weapon Release button.
Employment using BORE mode
BORE (boresight) delivery mode is intended for quick reactive or target-of-opportunity shots. Missiles can be
launched against any target in BORE mode without having to change the SPI. In BORE mode, the Maverick seeker
head is slaved to the pointer cross on the HUD.

  Summary
         1.     On the WPN format, set E/O sub-mode to BORE.
         2.     On the HUD, fly the boresight cross over the target and designate [RCtrl]+[Up].
         3.     Fire the missile [RAlt]+[Space].

    1.        On the WPN format, set E/O sub-mode to BORE.
              On the WPN format, set the delivery mode to BORE by depressing the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch or
              OSB 2. SOI will move to the WPN format. Confirm that seeker head video is available. SOI will move
              to the WPN page and missile seeker head position will be displayed on the HUD as a cross. Seeker
              head position will initially be boresight.




    2.        On the HUD, fly the boresight cross over the target and designate.
              Fly the pointer cross near your target, then use the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch to slew the pointer
              cross over the target. Reference both the HUD and the WPN format to correctly place the pointer cross,
              then press TMS Forward to designate.
     Confirm that the missile is tracking the correct target, the pointer cross is not flashing, and that the
     target is in range.
3.   Fire the missile.
     Fire the missile with the Weapon Release button.
Employment using TGP handoff
The TGP can hand-off targets to the AGM-65, which will attempt to track the TGP target. To improve the likelihood
of a successful handoff, perform the steps listed in Missile Boresighting above, prior to entering the target area.
You should have the TGP format active on one MFD and the WPN format active on the other.

  Summary
          1.     On the WPN format, set the delivery mode to PRE or VIS by depressing the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE
                 switch [Enter] or OSB2. Confirm that seeker head video is available.
          2.     Using the DMS switch, move SOI to the TGP format [RAlt]+[.].
          3.     Using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch, slew to the target. For a moving target, use TMS Forward
                 [RCtrl]+[Up] to switch to POINT track. (See Litening II Targeting Pod for more information.)


While the TGP is slewed, the Missile Boresight Correlator (MBC) will command the seeker head to match slew
and automatically attempt a track. During the attempt, HANDOFF IN PROGRESS will be displayed on the WPN
format. The amount of time to complete correlation is reduced if the missile boresight procedure was completed
prior to weapon employment.
If handoff succeeds, a “C” (correlated) will be displayed over the active pylon number. There is no need to switch
SOI away from the TGP format. Confirm that the missile is tracking the correct target, the pointer cross is not
flashing, and that the target is in range, then press the weapon release button to fire.
If the handoff cannot succeed, “I” (impossible) is displayed above the pylon number instead.


Ripple Fire
Up to two Mavericks can be queued with separate targets for a ripple fire (a.k.a. “quick-draw”) attack. When
more than one Maverick is tracking a target, two 10-mr LOS circles will appear on the HUD, labeled “1” and “2”.
The AGM-65s must be loaded on LAU-117 pylons for ripple fire to be available.

  Summary
          1.     On the SMS format, set RP to 2 (optional).
          2.     Using one of the delivery modes above, designate a target for the first Maverick [RCtrl]+[Up].
          3.     Press the Missile Step button [S] to step to the next missile.
          4.     Designate a target [RCtrl]+[Up] for the second Maverick.
          5.     Fire both missiles.


     1.        On the SMS format, set RP to 2 (optional).
               Optionally, set the release pulses to two. To do this, from the SMS page, press OSB 8 (labeled RP).
               Use the MFD to set the releases pulses to 2, then press ENTR (OSB 2).
2.   Using one of the delivery modes above, designate a target for the first Maverick.
     Using one of the delivery modes above, locate and designate a target for the first Maverick. Confirm
     that the missile is tracking the correct target. Do not fire the missile.




3.   Step to the next missile.
     Press the Missile Step button to step to the next missile.
4.   Designate a target for the second Maverick.
     Using the same procedure, locate and designate a target for the second missile. Confirm that the
     missile is tracking the correct target, the pointer cross is not flashing, and that the target is in range.
     On the HUD, LOS circles labeled “1” and “2” will indicate missile LOS and the order the missiles will fire
     in.
5.   Fire both missiles.
     If you set releases pulses to two, press and hold the Weapon Release button until both missiles have
     come off the rail. If not, press and hold the Weapon Release button once for each missile (twice total).
Force Correlate
The AGM-65G and -H models can be launched in force-correlate mode. This mode does not use the normal
centroid tracking algorithm suitable for targeting vehicles, instead using an image-correlation algorithm suitable
for tracking elements within a picture. Force-correlate mode is useful when launching Mavericks against static
targets such as buildings and structures, when it is desired that the Maverick impact a specific part of that
structure. Instead of tracking the target centroid, the Maverick will strive to impact the exact part of the image
that was targeted (e.g., the base of an antenna).

  Summary
          1.     Using one of the delivery modes above, locate a target.
          2.     Set the polarity mode to AREA.
          3.     Designate the image feature you wish to target [RCtrl]+[Up].
          4.     Fire the missile. [RAlt]+[Space]

     1.        Using one of the delivery modes above, locate a target.
               Select either PRE, VIS, or BORE mode and locate your target.
     2.        Set the polarity mode to AREA.
               Press OSB 7, or (if the WPN page is SOI) press TMS Right to cycle between polarity modes until AREA
               is shown next to OSB 7.




     3.        Designate the image feature you wish to target.
               Press DMS Aft-Short until the WPN page is SOI.
               Using the RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch, slew the targeting gate to the image feature you wish to
               target, then press TMS forward to designate it. Confirm that the missile is tracking the correct portion
               of the image, the pointer cross is not flashing, and the target is in range.
4.   Fire the missile.
     Fire the missile with the weapon release button.
DEFENSIVE SYSTEMS
  DEFENSIVE SYSTEMS
RADAR WARNING RECEIVER
The F-16C is equipped with the AN/ALR-56M Advanced Radar Warning Receiver system. The ALR-56M includes
an array of passive radar receiver antennas mounted to the exterior of the airframe, internal signal processors,
a threat warning azimuth indicator, and associated cockpit control panels.


                                                                                             High Band Antennas (2x)

                        High Band Antenna




                                                                                                 High Band Antenna




       Dual-Blade Low Band Antenna




                                AN/ALR-56M Advanced RWR Antenna Locations

When radar signals are detected by the external receiver antennas, the signal characteristics are analyzed and
processed by the ALR-56M electronics to determine the specific type of radar that has been detected, what mode
the radar is currently operating within, and its relative bearing from the aircraft. When these characteristics have
been processed, a corresponding symbol is displayed on the Threat Warning Azimuth Indicator and corresponding
audio feedback is provided to the pilot’s helmet.
Antenna coverage of the ALR-56M is 360° in azimuth but only ±45° in elevation. As
a result, the F-16C cannot detect radar signals that are directly above or below the
fuselage centerline. This should be considered when performing defensive
maneuvers at high pitch or roll attitudes, which could result in placing hostile radars
into an RWR blind spot. When this occurs, radar lock and missile launch warnings
will be lost.
When employing the CMDS in Semi-automatic or Automatic modes, this will also                         RWR
cause the ECM pod to cease emitting, which may increase the aircraft’s vulnerability              Blind Spot
to attack for the duration the hostile radar signals are within the RWR blind spot.
It is important to note that the RWR only detects the presence of radar signals; it does not indicate when a threat
radar can see the ownship aircraft, nor does it indicate whether a threat radar is actually tracking the ownship
aircraft or another aircraft along the same general bearing. Prudence should be taken when analyzing the
information the RWR is providing, and weighing that with the other sensors on board your aircraft to produce an
accurate assessment of the tactical situation.
Threat Warning Azimuth Indicator
The Threat Warning Azimuth Indicator is a circular-shaped display mounted in the upper left portion of the
Instrument Panel, with a brightness knob in the top left corner of the display that brightens or dims the display
itself. The Azimuth Indicator is an azimuth-only top-down display with the center of the display representing the
aircraft, and radar threat symbols displayed 360° in azimuth around it. If a threat symbol is displayed at the top
of the display, the associated radar is directly in front of the aircraft. If the threat symbol is displayed at the
bottom of the display, the associated radar is directly behind the aircraft.



                Brightness Knob                                                        SA-10 BIG BIRD SAM
                                                                                       radar in Search mode




                SA-6 SAM radar                                                          SA-10 SAM radar in
                 in Track mode                                                         Missile Guidance mode



               Airborne radar in                                                       Airborne radar
                 Search mode                                                           in Track mode



                                                                                        Early warning/
                                                                                       surveillance radar




The nature of the threat is indicated by the type of symbol, and the relative lethality of the threat is indicated by
the distance from the center of the display at which the threat symbols are positioned. Radar symbols that
represent more lethal threats to the aircraft are shown closer to the center of the display. As a threat radar
progresses from a search/acquisition mode, to target tracking, and then to missile guidance, the symbol will be
incrementally moved toward the center of the display to symbolize its increasing lethality against the aircraft.
    •    Radar in Search/Acquisition mode. The detected radar is operating in a search or target acquisition
         mode, with the symbol positioned along the outside of the display.
    •    Radar in Tracking mode. The detected radar is operating in a target tracking mode, with the symbol
         positioned just outside the solid white circle and enhanced by a box.
    •    Radar in Missile Guidance mode. The detected radar is operating in a missile guidance mode, with
         the symbol positioned inside the solid white circle and further enhanced by a flashing circle.
    •    Airborne Radar. Detected radars that correspond with airborne platforms, such as a fighter or other
         aircraft, are enhanced with a chevron over the symbol.
    •    Highest Priority Radar Threat. The radar threat that is determined to be the highest priority threat
         is enhanced by a diamond. The highest priority threat is continuously evaluated, which may cause the
         diamond to be reassigned to a different threat based on detected radar activity and relative lethality.
When performing defensive maneuvers, the symbols that are closer to the center of the display (especially those
that are actively engaging the aircraft) should take priority consideration over those along the outer area.
A complete list of all RWR symbols and their corresponding threat systems can be found in Appendix B.
When a new threat is detected, an audio tone will be played over the THREAT audio channel, which can be
adjusted on the AUDIO 1 control panel. Additionally, distinctive audio tones are played to indicate to the pilot
when a radar is detected in track or missile guidance modes.
Threat Warning Prime Control Panel
The Threat Warning Prime control panel is mounted to the left of the Azimuth Indicator and includes several
buttons for controlling the Azimuth Indicator display as well as several indicator lights.
1.   HANDOFF Button. Not implemented.
2.   MODE Button. Toggles the Azimuth Display
     between OPEN and PRIORITY modes.                     1. HANDOFF Button

     •    OPEN. “OPEN” is displayed on the lower             2. MODE Button
          portion of the button and the 16 highest
          priority radar threats are displayed on the      3. LAUNCH Button
          Threat Warning Azimuth Indicator.
     •    PRIORITY. “PRIORITY” is displayed on            4. TGT SEP Button
          the upper portion of the button and the 5
          highest priority radar threats are displayed   5. UNKNOWN Button
          on the Threat Warning Azimuth Indicator.
                                                          6. SYS TEST Button
3.   LAUNCH Button. When a threat radar is
     detected to be in missile guidance mode,
     “MISSILE LAUNCH” flashes on the button.
4.   TGT SEP Button. When pressed, “TGT SEP” is illuminated in the upper portion of the button and any threat
     symbols that are overlaid on top of each other are separated radially outward to aid in reading their symbol
     labels. Target separation is enabled for 5 seconds following the press of the TGT SEP button, after which all
     threat symbols will return to their original positions on the Azimuth Indicator.
5.   UNKNOWN Button. Enables/disables the ALR-56M UNKNOWN mode. When enabled, “U” is illuminated in
     the upper portion of the button and any radars that cannot be identified by the ALR-56M will be displayed
     on the Azimuth Indicator with a “U” symbol. When disabled, any such radar signals that are detected by the
     ALR-56M are not displayed on the Azimuth Indicator, but the “U” in the upper portion of the button will flash
     to indicate the presence of unknown radar signals.
6.   SYS TEST Button. When pressed and held for 1 second, “ON” is illuminated in the upper portion of the
     button while a system self-test is performed. All button lights on the Threat Warning Prime and Auxiliary
     control panels will illuminate, the Azimuth Indicator will display a series of diagnostic status messages and
     symbols, and a series of audio alert tones will be heard.
     When the self-test is complete, “ON” in the upper portion of the button will extinguish, all button lights on
     the Threat Warning Prime and Auxiliary control panels will extinguish as necessary, and the Azimuth
     Indicator will return to normal operation.
     The self-test may be manually aborted by pressing the SYS TEST button a second time.
Threat Warning Auxiliary Control Panel
The THREAT WARNING AUX control panel is mounted to the left of the CMDS control panel on the Left Auxiliary
Console. The panel includes buttons for powering and controlling the operation of the ALR-56M.
1.   SEARCH Button. Enables/disables the ALR-56M Search
     mode. When enabled, “S” is illuminated in the upper portion
     of the button and any radar signals that are determined to be
     early warning, surveillance, or non-lethal target acquisition
                                                                        1. SEARCH Button
     radars by the ALR-56M will be displayed on the Azimuth
     Indicator. When disabled, any such radar signals that are
     detected by the ALR-56M are not displayed on the Azimuth         2. ACT/PWR Button
     Indicator, but the “S” in the upper portion of the button will
     flash to indicate the presence of such radar signals.            3. ALTITUDE Button

             When Search Mode is enabled, an “S” symbol will be
                                                                        4. POWER Button
             displayed within the center of the Azimuth Indicator.
             If Search mode is enabled at the same as Low
                                                                            5. DIM Knob
             Altitude mode, the “S” symbol will alternate, or
             “mipple”, with the Low Altitude “L” symbol.
2.   ACT/PWR Button. When the ALR-56M is powered,
     “POWER” will illuminate in the lower portion of the button. If the ALR-56M detects any radar signals
     operating in a target tracking or missile guidance mode, “ACTIVITY” will illuminate in the upper portion of
     the button.
3.   ALTITUDE Button. Toggles the ALR-56M between High Altitude and Low Altitude modes.
     •    High Altitude Mode. “ALT” is illuminated on the lower portion of the button. Long-range, high-altitude
          air defense systems and fighter aircraft are prioritized as higher threats over short-range, low-altitude
          air defense systems. This mode may be appropriate for fighter sweeps, CAP patrols, or precision air
          strikes that are normally performed at high altitudes.
     •    Low Altitude Mode. “LOW” is illuminated in the upper portion of the button in addition to “ALT”.
          Short-range, low-altitude air defense systems and fighter aircraft are prioritized as higher threats over
          long-range, high-altitude air defense systems. This mode may be appropriate for low-level strikes,
          interdiction, or close air support operations that are normally performed at low altitudes.
             When Low Altitude mode is enabled, an “L” symbol will be displayed within the center of the Azimuth
             Indicator. If Low Altitude mode is enabled at the same as Search mode, the “L” symbol will
             alternate, or “mipple”, with the Search “S” symbol.
4.   POWER Button. Enables/disables power to the ALR-56M radar warning receiver. When the ALR-56M is
     powered, “SYSTEM POWER” will illuminate on the button.
5.   DIM knob. Rotating the knob clockwise increases the brightness intensity of the indicator lights on the
     panel as well as those on the Threat Warning Prime control panel.
COUNTERMEASURES DISPENSING SET
The F-16C is equipped with the AN/ALE-47 Airborne Countermeasures Dispensing Set (CMDS) for protection
against radar-guided and infrared-guided threats. The ALE-47 includes four expendable countermeasure
dispensers mounted to the exterior of the airframe, internal processors, and a control panel within the cockpit.
The cockpit-mounted CMDS control panel allows the pilot to review expendable countermeasure quantities,
configure CMDS modes of operation, and manage individual countermeasure programs.



                            ALE-47 Dispensers




                                                      ALE-47 Dispenser



                      AN/ALE-47 Airborne Countermeasures Dispenser Locations

The main interfaces with the CMDS are through the CMDS Control Panel and the CMDS DED pages. The primary
controls for countermeasure employment are on the Side Stick Controller (SSC).


CMDS Control Panel
The CMDS control panel is located on the Left                       1. Status Displays                  2. Quantity Display
Auxiliary Console and powers the ALE-47
countermeasure dispensers and configures the
                                                   3. RWR Switch
CMDS Manual programs and modes of
operation.                                        4. O1/O2/CH/FL
                                                      Switches
1.   Status Displays. Indicates the status of
     the countermeasures dispensing set.
                                                   5. No function
     •    NO GO. The CMDS is powered but
          has malfunctioned and cannot             6. No function
          dispense countermeasures.
     •    GO. The CMDS is powered and ready
          to dispense countermeasures.                               7. JETT Switch      8. PRGM Knob      9. MODE Knob

     •    DISPENSE RDY. The CMDS is ready to dispense countermeasures in reaction to a threat but requires
          consent from the pilot when CMDS MODE knob is set to SEMI. This will be accompanied by a
          “COUNTER” voice message, if enabled on the CMDS BINGO DED page.
2.   Quantity Display. Displays the remaining quantity of each countermeasure type on board the aircraft.
     System failure messages are also displayed in these display fields when applicable.
     If a countermeasure type is at or below the respective Bingo quantity set on the CMDS BINGO DED page,
     “LO” will displayed adjacent to the corresponding countermeasure type. This will be accompanied by a
     “LOW” voice message, if enabled on the CMDS BINGO DED page.
3.   RWR Switch. Enables the CMDS to use threat indications detected by the ALR-56M Radar Warning Receiver
     to determine appropriate countermeasure programs when CMDS MODE is set to SEMI or AUTO.
4.   O1/O2/CH/FL Switches. Enables the dispensing of the respective countermeasure type. When set to the
     ON position, the quantity of the corresponding countermeasure type will be displayed on the Quantity Display
     above the switch.
     •    O1. No function.
     •    O2. No function.
     •    CH. Chaff cartridges are enabled for dispensing.
     •    FL. Flare cartridges are enabled for dispensing.
5.   JMR Switch. No function.
6.   MWS Switch. No function.
7.   JETT Switch. When moved to the forward position, all expendable countermeasures on board the aircraft
     will be dispensed simultaneously, regardless of the position of the CMDS MODE knob.
8.   PRGM Knob. Selects the CMDS program to be manually dispensed using CMS Forward on the SSC when
     the CMDS Mode is in Manual, Semi-automatic, or Automatic.
     •    BIT. Initiates a BIT of the CMDS. (N/I)
     •    1. Selects Manual Program 1.
     •    2. Selects Manual Program 2.
     •    3. Selects Manual Program 3.
     •    4. Selects Manual Program 4.
9.   MODE Knob. Selects the operating mode of the CMDS.
     •    OFF. The CMDS is not powered and dispensing is not possible, except for jettison using the JETT
          switch. ECM pod emissions are disabled.
     •    STBY. The CMDS is powered but dispensing is not enabled, except for jettison using the JETT switch.
          Changes to the CMDS settings and programs may be made using the CMDS DED pages while in this
          mode. ECM pod emissions are disabled.
     •    MAN. The CMDS is powered and only Manual programs may be dispensed. ECM pod emissions are
          enabled and disabled manually by the pilot.
               o    CMS Aft will activate ECM pod noise jamming signals if ECM XMIT switch is in position 3.
               o    CMS Right will deactivate ECM pod noise jamming signals.
               o    Manual Programs 1-4 may be dispensed based on the position of the PRGM knob.
               o    Manual Programs 5 and 6 may be dispensed.
•   SEMI. The CMDS is powered and determines the appropriate Automatic program to be dispensed
    based on the threat; and will dispense a single Automatic program if consent is provided by the pilot.
    ECM pod emissions require pilot consent but will only occur when the aircraft is actively being engaged
    by a hostile radar threat.
         o    CMDS selects the appropriate Automatic Program against the current radar threat. The pilot
              is prompted by DISPENSE RDY Status Display on the CMDS panel and a “COUNTER” voice
              message to dispense a Manual program or provide consent to dispense a single Automatic
              program.
         o    Once an Automatic or Manual program has completed, the pilot will be prompted again to
              dispense a Manual program or provide consent to dispense a single Automatic program.
         o    CMS Aft will dispense a single Automatic Program and will enable the ECM pod to emit
              deception jamming signals any time the aircraft is locked by a hostile radar threat if ECM
              XMIT switch is in position 1 or 2.
         o    Automatic programs will not be dispensed if the chaff is in LO status.
         o    CMS Right will disable the ECM pod from emitting.
         o    Manual Programs 1-4 may be dispensed based on the position of the PRGM knob.
         o    Manual Programs 5 and 6 may be dispensed.
•   AUTO. The CMDS is powered and determines the appropriate Automatic program to be dispensed
    based on the threat; and will repetitively dispense the selected Automatic program if consent is
    provided by the pilot. ECM pod emissions do not require pilot consent and will occur any time the
    aircraft is actively being engaged by a hostile radar threat.
         o    CMDS selects the appropriate Automatic Program against the current radar threat. If consent
              has already been given to dispense Automatic programs, the selected Automatic program
              will be repetitively dispensed any time the aircraft is locked by a hostile radar threat, until
              the aircraft is no longer locked by a hostile radar threat or the chaff reaches the Bingo
              quantity set on the CMDS BINGO DED page.
         o    CMS Right will revoke consent for dispensing Automatic programs and will interrupt any
              Automatic or Manual programs that are currently in progress.
         o    CMS Aft will grant consent for dispensing Automatic programs.
              NOTE: Consent is granted as the default state each time the CMDS MODE knob is moved
              into the AUTO position.
         o    If the ECM power switch is set to OPR, the ECM pod will override the XMIT switch position
              and emit deception jamming signals until the aircraft is no longer being locked by a hostile
              radar threat. The ECM will operate in ECM Priority mode, unless the current weapon profile
              is AIM-120, in which case the ECM pod will operate in Avionics Priority mode.
         o    Automatic programs will not be dispensed if the chaff is in LO status.
         o    Manual Programs 1-4 may be dispensed based on the position of the PRGM knob.
         o    Manual Programs 5 and 6 may be dispensed.
•   BYP. Bypass mode may be used if the other CMDS modes have malfunctioned in any way. When CMS
    Forward is pressed, one chaff cartridge and one flare cartridge will be dispensed. Manual Programs 1
    through 6 will be unavailable, as well as any other CMS functions. If the ECM pod is currently emitting
    in deception jamming mode, it will continue to emit until the current threat is no longer present, after
    which it will be placed in a standby state.
CMDS BINGO DED Page
The Countermeasures Dispensing Set DED page is accessed by pressing 7/MARK button on the ICP keypad
when the LIST DED page is displayed on the DED. This page allows the pilot to edit the “BINGO” quantity values
for each expendable countermeasure type and toggle voice message alerts regarding countermeasure dispensing.
NOTE: Prior to making any changes on the CMDS BINGO DED page, the CMDS MODE knob must be set to the
STBY position on the CMDS control panel to prevent erroneous data entry into the CMDS settings.

              1. DED Asterisks
                                                                                                 5. Selected Steerpoint
        2. Chaff Bingo Quantity
                                                                                                 6. Feedback Voice Message
        3. Flare Bingo Quantity
                                                                                                 7. Request Countermeasures
                                                                                                       Voice Message
            4. Other 1/Other 2
             Bingo Quantities
                                                                                                 8. Bingo Voice Message


                                                                                           Move DED asterisks to
            Modify                              Cycle to next steerpoint                   the previous data field


                                     Reject
                                                                             Return DED                               Cycle DED to
                                     Accept                                                                          next CMDS page
                                                                             to CNI page




                           Operate            Cycle to previous steerpoint                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                           to the next data field


1.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     enter a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
2.   Chaff Bingo Quantity. Displays the chaff “LO” threshold. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks
     over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid entries range from 0
     to 99.
3.   Flare Bingo Quantity. Displays the flare “LO” threshold. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks
     over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid entries range from 0
     to 99.
4.   Other 1/Other 2 Bingo Quantities. No function.
5.   Selected Steerpoint. Displays the selected steerpoint. The ICP Increment/Decrement rocker may be used
     to cycle to a different steerpoint.
6.   Feedback Voice Message. When set to ON, a “CHAFF FLARE” voice message will be played when an
     Automatic or Manual program begins dispensing, regardless of whether the program includes either
     countermeasure type. May be toggled by placing the DED asterisks over the data field and pressing any ICP
     keypad button 1-9.
7.   Request Countermeasures Voice Message. When set to ON, a “COUNTER” voice message will be played
     when the CMDS MODE is set to SEMI and pilot consent is requested to dispense an Automatic program. May
     be toggled by placing the DED asterisks over the data field and pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9.
8.   Bingo Voice Message. When set to ON, a “LOW” voice message will be played when a countermeasure
     type has reached its Bingo threshold, and an “OUT” voice message will be played when depleted. May be
     toggled by placing the DED asterisks over the data field and pressing any ICP keypad button 1-9.
CMDS CHAFF & FLARE DED Pages
The CMDS Chaff and Flare DED pages are accessed by pressing 7/MARK button on the ICP keypad when the
LIST DED page is displayed, and then momentarily setting the ICP DCS switch to the SEQ position. These pages
allow the pilot to modify the dispensing sequence of chaff and/or flares when Manual programs are employed.
NOTE: Prior to making any changes on the CMDS BINGO DED page, the CMDS MODE knob must be set to the
STBY position on the CMDS control panel to prevent erroneous data entry into the CMDS settings.

                                                                                                  5. Manual
               1. Burst Quantity                                                               Program Number

                2. Burst Interval

               3. Salvo Quantity                                                                6. DED Asterisks

               4. Salvo Interval


                                                                                       Move DED asterisks to
           Modify                             Cycle to next program                    the previous data field


                                    Reject
                                                                         Return DED                               Cycle DED to
                                    Accept                               to CNI page                             next CMDS page




                          Operate            Cycle to previous program                  Move DED asterisks
                                                                                       to the next data field


1.   Burst Quantity. Number of cartridges dispensed within each salvo. May be modified by placing the DED
     asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid entries range
     from 0 to 99.
2.   Burst Interval. Time interval between cartridges dispensed within a salvo. May be modified by placing the
     DED asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid entries
     range from 0.020 to 10.000, in 0.001 increments.
3.   Salvo Quantity. Number of salvos within the program. May be modified by placing the DED asterisks over
     the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid entries range from 0 to 99.
4.   Salvo Interval. Time interval between each salvo within the program. May be modified by placing the DED
     asterisks over the data field, inputting a value using the ICP keypad, and pressing ENTR. Valid entries range
     from 0.50 to 150.00 in 0.01 increments.
5.   Manual Program Number. Displays the Manual program that is being edited. The ICP
     Increment/Decrement rocker may be used to cycle to a different Manual program.
     •    Manual Program 1-4. Dispensed by pressing CMS Forward when the CMDS Mode is in Manual, Semi-
          automatic, or Automatic, based on the position of the CMDS PRGM knob.
     •    Manual Program 5. Dispensed by pressing the CHAFF/FLARE Dispense button, located on the left
          cockpit wall above the throttle, when the CMDS Mode is in Manual, Semi-automatic, or Automatic.
     •    Manual Program 6. Dispensed by pressing CMS Left when the CMDS Mode is in Manual, Semi-
          automatic, or Automatic.
6.   DED Asterisks. If a data field on the DED is bracketed by these symbols, the ICP keypad may be used to
     input a different value, or the 0/M-SEL button may be used to enable it in some cases. A data field that has
     been modified but has not been accepted will be highlighted. When the modified data is accepted (ICP ENTR
     button) or rejected (ICP RCL button) the data field will be returned to normal, de-highlighted text.
Setting the Burst Quantity or Salvo Quantity to 0 on the CMDS CHAFF or CMDS FLARE DED pages will prevent
the respective countermeasure type from being dispensed within the displayed Manual program. In the example
below, the BQ value on the CMDS CHAFF DED page has been set to 0 for Manual program 6, and the values on
the CMDS FLARE DED page are configured as shown on the inset image of the DED.




                                                                                          Salvo 2



                                                                                        0.02 second
                                                                                      between 2 flares



                                    Salvo 1



                                  0.02 second
                                between 2 flares


                           Countermeasure Program Quantities & Intervals

In this example, Manual program 6 is dispensed by pressing CMS Left on the SSC, resulting in only flares being
dispensed in accordance with the settings shown above.


CMDS OTHER1 & OTHER2 DED Pages
The CMDS OTHER1 and OTHER2 DED pages have no function. Chaff and flares are the only expendable
countermeasures utilized by the F-16C variant that is simulated by DCS: F-16C Viper.




Momentarily setting the ICP DCS switch to the SEQ position will cycle through these pages back to the CMDS
BINGO DED page.
ELECTRONIC COUNTERMEASURES
Electronic countermeasures (or ECM) pods can be carried to provide an additional layer of protection against
radar threats such as surface-to-air missile (SAM) batteries. Depending on the sophistication and range of the
radar system that is attempting to acquire and track the aircraft, ECM pods can be used to deny, degrade or
delay an attack so that the pilot can escape the engagement envelope of the threat system, evade incoming
weapons, or gain additional time to execute their mission before being forced to take evasive maneuvers.




                                                  AN/ALQ-184 ECM pod




The F-16C can be equipped with either the AN/ALQ-131 or AN/ALQ-184 electronic countermeasures pods.


Radar Jamming
A radar system relies on its ability to receive reflections of its own radio signals off an object, and that these
reflections (called “radar returns”) are strong enough to be processed among other noise and clutter within the
electromagnetic environment. Radar jamming is a type of electronic attack that intentionally radiates radio signals
back to a radar system in order to confuse or degrade the radar’s ability to calculate range and position using its
own radar signals. By matching the victim radar’s signal characteristics, a radar jammer can effectively send false
information into the victim radar. This can be done using “noise jamming” or “deception jamming”.


   Object detected by radar                                                          Transmitted radar signals


                           Reflected radar return is
                       processed as position and range




                                                         Radar Detection
Noise Jamming
Noise jamming is accomplished by saturating a victim radar with radio signals that match the frequencies
transmitted by its own radar antenna. This is primarily performed to deny ranging data by interfering with the
radar’s ability to accurately measure the elapsed time between transmissions and reflected radar energy.



      Aircraft emitting                                                             Transmitted radar signals
    matching radar signals



                     True radar return is masked within a
                  continuous stream of radar energy, denying
                     range information to the victim radar




                                                         Noise Jamming

Unfortunately, since noise jamming relies upon the continuous transmission of high-power radio signals, often
across multiple frequencies (known as “barrage jamming”), it can also highlight the presence of the aircraft to
hostile radar systems before the aircraft itself would have been detected.


Deception Jamming
Deception jamming is accomplished by analyzing a radar signal, and then retransmitting a signal that precisely
matches the signal characteristics in order to generate false targeting information. In contrast to noise jamming,
deception jamming can either produce false target returns or introduce errors into automatic target tracking
techniques within certain radar systems.



       Aircraft emitting                                                             Transmitted radar signals
     matching radar signals


                       True radar return is masked by a
                    stronger radio signal retransmitted to
                   create erroneous range or position data




                                                      Deception Jamming

The advantage of deception jamming is that the jammer itself can be employed intermittently so as to avoid
highlighting the position of the aircraft until necessary. However, depending on the specific radar system, the
effectiveness of these jamming techniques may vary.
Burnthrough
“Burnthrough” may occur when the radar
return of the aircraft is strong enough that
it exceeds the power of the jammer’s radio                Aircraft emitting
                                                                                                       Transmitted radar signals
                                                        matching radar signals
signal when received by the victim radar.
Burnthrough commonly occurs when the
aircraft is at closer ranges to the victim
                                                                       True radar return is strong
radar, which will produce a stronger radar                              enough to overcome the
return. As such, the range at which                                  signal strength of the jammer
burnthrough occurs will vary between
different types of radar systems.
                                                                   Radar “Burnthrough” of Jamming Signals




Application of Electronic Countermeasures
Although ECM does not provide a guarantee against enemy air defenses, when properly employed during a
mission ECM can provide additional time to determine the best way to counter enemy air defenses, or allow an
attack aircraft to sufficiently reduce their range to target in order to employ their own weapons.
            Weapon Engagement Zone (WEZ)                          “Burnthrough” range



                                                                                                     Munitions employed against
                                                                                                     air defenses or targets that
     Attack aircraft entering                              Attack aircraft is able to approach        are under their protection
      WEZ of air defenses                                    within range of own weapons


                                Jamming signals delay
                                 enemy air defenses




                            Electronic Countermeasures Against Enemy Air Defenses
ECM Control Panel
The ECM control panel is located on the Left
Console and controls the operation of the        1. ECM Power Switch
ALQ-131 or ALQ-184 ECM pod (if installed).
                                                      2. XMIT Switch
NOTE: Each ECM pod available to the DCS:
F-16C Viper functions identically within DCS
                                                        3. DIM Knob
World. The selection of a specific pod may
provide other benefits such as different
weight and drag impacts, emulating the
inventory of a specific country’s military, or            4. RESET Button   5. BIT Button   6. ECM Module Control Buttons
simulating a specific conflict or time period.
1.   ECM Power Switch. Controls the ECM pod operation.
     •    OPR. ECM pod is powered and operating. Threat signals are processed, and the pod’s transmitters
          operate in accordance with the settings on this panel and the Hands-On Controls.
          NOTE: If the pod has not completed the warm-up prior to moving the switch from STBY to OPR, the
          pod will not emit jamming signals until the warm-up is complete.
     •    STBY. ECM pod is powered and begins warm-up (approximately 3 minutes) but will not process threat
          signals or emit jamming signals.
     •    OFF. ECM pod is not powered.
2.   XMIT Switch. Determines the operational mode of the ECM pod.
     •    1 – Deception jamming mode (Avionics Priority). The ECM pod will reactively emit jamming
          signals if the ECM system determines the aircraft is being actively tracked or engaged by a threat radar
          system. The FCR will continue to operate, however the FCR detection and lock ranges will be reduced.
          The CMDS MODE knob must be set to SEMI or AUTO to enable ECM emissions when set to this mode.
     •    2 – Deception jamming mode (ECM Priority). The ECM pod will reactively emit jamming signals
          if the ECM system determines the aircraft is being actively tracked or engaged by a threat radar system.
          The FCR will be placed in a standby state, unless the current weapon profile is AIM-120, in which case
          the ECM pod will operate in Avionics Priority mode.
          The CMDS MODE knob must be set to SEMI or AUTO to enable ECM emissions when set to this mode.
     •    3 – Noise jamming mode (ECM Priority). The ECM pod will continuously transmit jamming signals
          in a preemptive manner. The FCR will be placed in a standby state.
          CAUTION: Continuously broadcasting jamming signals in position 3 will increase the likelihood your
          aircraft’s presence will be detected by hostile aircraft or air defense units.
          The CMDS MODE knob must be set to MAN to enable ECM emissions when set to this mode.
3.   DIM Knob. Controls the brightness of the ECM panel indicator lights on the module control buttons.
4.   RESET Button. No function.
5.   BIT Button. Performs a Built-In Test of the ECM pod. (N/I)
6.   Manual Band Control Buttons. Selectively enables emissions from individual modules within the ECM
     pod. Each button is latched in that the buttons are pressed down and held in place to enable that module;
     or pressed down and popped out to disable that module.
     •    1. Enables/disables Band 1 module.
•   2. Enables/disables Band 2 module.
•   3. Enables/disables Band 3 module.
•   4. Enables/disables Band 4 module.
•   5. Enables/disables Band 5 module.
•   (Blank). Enables/disables an un-marked module for growth within the system.
•   FRM. No function.
•   SPL. No function.
    Four status lights on each button provide an indication as to the operational state of the ECM modules.
    •    S. Standby. The ECM module is powered but not enabled for transmission.
    •    A. Active. The ECM module is powered and enabled for transmission.
    •    F. Failed. The ECM module has malfunctioned or failed.
    •    T. Transmitting. The ECM module is powered and is currently transmitting.
    NOTE: The Manual Band Control Buttons in the DCS: F-16C Viper function identically within DCS World.
    The selection of different ECM modules will not produce different effects on a given threat system.
HANDS-ON CONTROLS
The Countermeasures Management Switch (CMS) on the Side Stick
Controller (SSC) is the pilot’s primary control over the F-16C’s
defensive systems. The CMS is a 4-way switch which controls the
deployment of countermeasures and operation of the ECM pod (if
installed).
CMDS MODE – MAN. The following CMS actions
are performed when the CMDS Mode is set to
Manual.                                                                     Countermeasures
                                                                        Management Switch (4-way)

                  Dispense Manual Program 1-41



     Dispense Manual                       Deactivate ECM
     Program 6                             noise jamming2



                  Activate ECM noise jamming2


CMDS MODE – SEMI. The following CMS actions                     CMDS MODE – AUTO. The following CMS actions
are performed when the CMDS Mode is set to Semi-                are performed when the CMDS Mode is set to
automatic.                                                      Automatic.

                  Dispense Manual Program 1-41                               Dispense Manual Program 1-41

                                                                                                       Disable dispensing of
     Dispense Manual                       Disable ECM            Dispense Manual                      Automatic Program or
     Program 6                             deception jamming2     Program 6                            interrupt dispensing of
                                                                                                       Manual Program


               Dispense one Automatic Program                                 Enable continuous dispensing
               Enable ECM deception jamming2                                  of Automatic Program


     Short press (<0.5 sec)


1.   CMS Forward will dispense the Manual Program selected by the CMDS PRGM knob, unless another Manual
     or Automatic program is already in progress.
2.   XMIT Switch on ECM Panel must be set to positions 1 or 2 to enable Deception jamming in Semi-automatic
     CMDS mode, or position 3 to activate Noise jamming in Manual CMDS mode.



CHAFF/FLARE Dispense Button
The CHAFF/FLARE Dispense button is located on the left cockpit wall outboard
and above the throttle, and immediately aft of the canopy locking lever.
                                                                                       Throttle
The button is used to dispense Manual Program 5 when the CMDS Mode is                                        CHAFF/FLARE
set to Manual, Semi-automatic, or Automatic. This button operates                                              Dispense
                                                                                                                Button
independently of the CMS functions on the Side Stick Controller (SSC).
APPENDICES
     APPENDICES
APPENDIX A – ABBREVIATED CHECKLISTS
Procedures
Before Engine Start                      Before Taxi                             Descent/Before Landing

Engine Start                             Taxi                                    After Landing

After Engine Start                       Before Takeoff                          Engine Shutdown

Normal INS Alignment                     Takeoff                                 Pre-Refueling Checklist

Stored Heading INS Alignment                                                     Post-Refueling Checklist


Navigation
Selecting a Steerpoint                 Storing a Markpoint (HUD)              Storing a Markpoint (OFLY)

Editing a Steerpoint                   Storing a Markpoint (HMCS)             Tuning a TACAN Station

Modifying an Offset Aimpoint           Storing a Markpoint (FCR)              Tuning an ILS Localizer

Converting MGRS to Lat/Long            Storing a Markpoint (TGP)

Performing an In-Flight Alignment with GPS-aiding          Performing an In-Flight Alignment without GPS-aiding

Performing a Position Fix (HUD)                            Performing an Altitude Calibration (HUD)

Performing a Position Fix (FCR)                            Performing an Altitude Calibration (FCR)

Performing a Position Fix (TGP)                            Performing an Altitude Calibration (TGP)

Performing a Position Fix (OFLY)                           Performing an Altitude Calibration (RALT)



Radio Communications
Tuning a Preset Frequency (Upfront Controls)              Tuning a Preset Frequency (UHF Backup)

Editing a Preset Frequency (Upfront Controls)             Tuning a Manual Frequency (UHF Backup)

Tuning a Manual Frequency (Upfront Controls)


Combat Employment
Performing Pre-Combat Checks                                 Designating the RP using Direct Overflight

Designating the IP using Direct Overflight                   Aligning the RP using VRP Cursor Slew
                                                                                                 Return to
                                                                                               Checklist index
Procedures
Abbreviated checklists for performing start-up, INS alignment, taxi, takeoff, landing, shutdown, and aerial
refueling procedures.


Before Engine Start
 1     MAIN PWR switch – BATT.
       Verify light:
 2
            •     ACFT BATT FLCS RLY – On.
 3     FLCS PWR TEST switch – TEST and hold.
       Verify lights:
 4          •      FLCS PMG , ACFT BATT TO FLCS , and FLCS PWR A , B , C , D – On.
            •     ACFT BATT FLCS RLY – Off.
 5     FLCS PWR TEST switch – Release.
 6     MAIN PWR switch – MAIN PWR.
       Verify lights:
            •      ENGINE and HYD/OIL PRESS warning lights – On.
 7          •      ELEC SYS and SEC caution lights – On.
            •     ACFT BATT FLCS RLY – On.
            •      EPU GEN and EPU PMG – Off.
 8     Communications – Established with ground crew and ATC as required for engine start.
 9     Canopy – As desired.
 10    Chocks – In place.
 11    Ground crew – Clear of intake and other danger areas.



Engine Start
 1     JFS switch – START 2.
 2     SEC caution light – Off.
 3     Throttle – Advance to IDLE.
 4     ENGINE warning light – Off (approximately 60% RPM).
       Verify lights:
 5          •      SEAT NOT ARMED caution light – On.
            •     Three green WHEELS down lights – On.
 6     JFS switch – Confirm OFF; manually set to OFF if necessary.
 7     HYD/OIL PRESS warning light – Off.
 8     FUEL FLOW – 700-1700 PPH.
                                                                                                 Return to
                                                                                               Checklist index
 9    Engine OIL pressure – 15 PSI (minimum).
 10   Engine NOZ POS – above 94%.
 11   Engine RPM – 62%-80%.
 12   Engine FTIT – 650° C or less.
 13   HYD PRESS A & B – 2850-3250 PSI.



After Engine Start
 1    TEST panel – Check.
 2    AVIONICS POWER panel – Set MMC, ST STA, MFD, UFC, GPS.
 3    INS – Align. (See Normal INS Alignment or Stored Heading INS Alignment on the following page)
 4    AVIONICS POWER panel – Set DL, MIDS LVT.
 5    SNSR PWR panel – Set.
 6    HUD – As desired.
 7    C & I knob – UFC.
 8    Secondary (SEC) engine control mode – Check.
 9    Flight controls – Cycle to ensure maximum deflection of flight control surfaces.
 10   FLCS BIT – Initiate and monitor.
 11   ECM panel – As required.
 12   SPD BRK switch – Cycle to extended position and then retract.
 13   WHEELS down lights – Three green.
 14   Standby Attitude Indicator – Uncage and set.
 15   FUEL QTY SEL knob – Check and set.
 16   EPU FUEL quantity – 95-102%.
 17   Avionics, MFD’s, and VHF radio – Configure as required.
 18   DBU – Check (after FLCS BIT is complete).
 19   TRIM – Check.
 20   MPO – Check.
 21   Operate controls – Verify all surfaces respond normally and no FLCS lights illuminate.
 22   Air refueling system (if required) – Check.
 23   EPU GEN and EPU PMG – Confirm Off.
 24   EPU – Check.
                                                                                                    Return to
                                                                                                  Checklist index
Normal INS Alignment
 1     INS Knob – ALIGN NORM.
 2     ICP Keypad – Input 2 for N (North) or 8 for S (South).
       ICP Keypad – Input Latitude in DD°MM.M’ format, which is input as DDMMM in a continuous string of
 3
       five numbers.
 4     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it and input different data.
 5     ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED Asterisks around LNG data field.
 6     ICP Keypad – Input 6 for E (East) or 4 for W (West).
       ICP Keypad – Input Longitude in DDD°MM.M’ format, which is input as DDDMMM in a continuous string
 7
       of six numbers, to include a leading zero if necessary.
 8     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it and input different data.
 9     ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED Asterisks around SALT data field.
 10    ICP Keypad – Input Altitude in feet.
 11    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it and input different data.


When “RDY” flashes on the INS DED page and “ALIGN” flashes in the HUD, the alignment is complete.

 12    INS Knob – NAV.



Stored Heading INS Alignment
 1     INS Knob – ALIGN STOR HDG.


When “RDY” flashes on the INS DED page and “ALIGN” flashes in the HUD, the alignment is complete.

 2     INS Knob – NAV.
                                                                                                Return to
                                                                                              Checklist index
Before Taxi
 1     Canopy – Close and lock.
 2     Backup UHF radio – Set and check as required.
 3     Altimeter and altitude indications – Set and check.
 4     Exterior lights – As required.
 5     INS knob – NAV.
 6     Chocks – Remove.



Taxi
 1     Throttle – Advance.
 2     Brakes and NWS – Check.
 3     Heading – Check.
 4     Flight instruments – Check for proper operation.



Before Takeoff
 1     ALT FLAPS switch – Verify NORM.
 2     Trim – Check.
 3     ENG CONT switch – Verify PRI (guard down).
 4     Speedbrakes – Verify closed.
 5     Canopy – Verify closed and locked.
 6     IFF – Set and check. (N/I)
 7     External fuel tanks – Verify feeding.
 8     FUEL QTY SEL knob – NORM.
 9     STORES CONFIG switch – As required.
 10    OXYGEN SUPPLY lever – PBG (if high-G maneuvers are expected immediately following takeoff).
 11    PROBE HEAT switch – PROBE HEAT (if required).
 12    Ejection safety lever – Down (Armed).
 13    Flight controls – Cycle.
 14    Engine OIL pressure – 15-65 PSI.
 15    Warning and caution lights – Verify no unexpected conditions.
 16    Targeting pod – Stow (if installed).
                                                                                                              Return to
                                                                                                            Checklist index
Takeoff
 1   Brakes – Hold.
 2   Parking Brake – Verify disengaged.
 3   Throttle – 90% RPM. Check for normal engine indications:
 4    HYD/OIL PRESS warning light – Off.
 5   OIL pressure – 25-65 PSI
 6   FTIT – 935° C or less
 7   HYD PRESS A & B – 2850-3250 PSI


                       TAKEOFF SPEED BASED ON AIRCRAFT GROSS WEIGHT
 GROSS WEIGHT (GWT)     20,000 lbs.   24,000 lbs.   28,000 lbs.   32,000 lbs.   36,000 lbs.   40,000 lbs.    44,000 lbs.

TAKEOFF SPEED (KCAS)       128 kts     142 kts       156 kts       168 kts       178 kts       188 kts         198 kts


     LG Handle – UP; after a positive rate of climb is established.
 8
     NOTE: Ensure landing gear is fully retracted with the gear doors closed before exceeding 300 KCAS.



Descent/Before Landing
 1   Fuel – Check quantity/transfer/balance.
 2   Landing Light – On.
 3   Altimeter – Set and check.
 4   Attitude References – Check.
 5   ANTI ICE switch – As required.
 6   Targeting pod – Stow (if installed).



After Landing
 1   PROBE HEAT switch – Verify OFF.
 2   ECM Power switch – OFF.
 3   Speedbrakes – Close.
 4   Ejection Safety Lever – Safe (Up).
 5   IFF MASTER knob – STBY.
 6   LANDING/TAXI Light switch – As required.
 7   MASTER ARM and LASER ARM switches – OFF.
                                                                                               Return to
                                                                                             Checklist index
Engine Shutdown
 1    C & I knob – BACKUP.
 2    HUD SYM knob – Minimize.
 3    SNSR PWR panel – Set.
 4    AVIONICS POWER panel – Set.
      Throttle – OFF.
 5    NOTE: Wait at least 10 seconds after INS knob has been moved to OFF before shutting down the
      engine.
 6    JFS RUN light – Confirm off.
 7    EPU GEN and EPU PMG – Confirm Off.
      MAIN PWR switch – OFF.
 8
      NOTE: Delay placing MAIN PWR switch to OFF until after engine rpm decreases through 20 percent.
 9    OXYGEN SUPPLY lever – OFF.
 10   OXYGEN Diluter lever – 100%.
 11   Canopy – Open.
                                                                                                   Return to
                                                                                                 Checklist index
Pre-Refueling Checklist
 1    MASTER ARM switch – OFF.
 2    LASER ARM switch – OFF.
 3    CMDS MODE knob – STBY.
      Emitters – Off or Standby.
 4
      NOTE: Emitters should be disabled prior to reaching the Pre-contact position.
 5    AIR REFUEL switch – OPEN. (3-5 minutes prior to refueling if equipped with external fuel tanks)
 6    AR Status Light – Verify lRDYl.
 7    HOT MIC/CIPHER switch – HOT MIC.
      Exterior Lights – As required. For night refueling set:
           •    POSITION WING/TAIL switch – DIM.
 8
           •    POSITION FLASH/STEADY switch – STEADY.
           •    ANTI-COLL knob – OFF.



Post-Refueling Checklist
 1    AIR REFUEL switch – CLOSE.
 2    HOT MIC/CIPHER switch – OFF.
 3    Fuel quantity – Check. Verify proper transfer and balance.
 4    AR Status Lights – All off.
 5    Exterior Lights – As required.
 6    Emitters – As required.
 7    MASTER ARM – As required.
 8    LASER ARM – As required.

 9    CMDS MODE knob – As required.
                                                                                                      Return to
                                                                                                    Checklist index
Navigation
Abbreviated checklists for performing navigation, editing steerpoints and offset aimpoints within the navigation
database, storing markpoints, tuning navigation aids (TACAN or ILS), performing in-flight INS alignments, and
performing position fixes and altitude calibrations to maintain INS accuracy.


Selecting a Steerpoint
To select a steerpoint using the Upfront Controls, perform the following:

       ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the steerpoint number.
 1     or
       ICP Keypad – Press 4/STPT to display the STPT DED page.
 2     ICP Keypad – Input the steerpoint number.
 3     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.


To select a steerpoint using the Hands-On Controls, perform the following:

 1     DMS Left or DMS Right – Press as necessary to display the HSD format on either MFD.
 2     DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to assign the Sensor-Of-Interest (SOI) to the HSD MFD format.
       RDR CURSOR/ENABLE Switch – Slew the HSD cursor to the symbol of the steerpoint that is intended to
 3
       be used for navigation.
 4     TMS Up-Short – Press to select the steerpoint symbol.



Editing a Steerpoint
 1     ICP LIST Button – Press.
 2     ICP Keypad – Press 1/T-ILS to display the DEST UTM DED page.
 3     ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to cycle to the DEST DIR DED page (P2>).
       ICP Keypad – Input the steerpoint number.
 4     or
       ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the steerpoint number.
 5     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
 6     ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around LAT data field.
 7     ICP Keypad – Input 2 for North or 8 for South.
       ICP Keypad – Input latitude in DD°MM.MMM’ format, which is input as DDMMMMM in a continuous
 8
       string of seven numbers.
 9     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 10    ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around LON data field.
 11    ICP Keypad – Input 6 for East or 4 for West.
                                                                                                Return to
                                                                                              Checklist index
      ICP Keypad – Input longitude in DDD°MM.MMM’ format, which is input as DDDMMMMM in a continuous
 12
      string of eight numbers, to include a leading zero if necessary.
 13   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 14   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around ELEV data field.
 15   ICP Keypad – Input the elevation in feet.
 16   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 17   (Optional) ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around TOS data field.
      ICP Keypad – Input the desired time in a 24-hour HH:MM:SS format, which is input as HHMMSS in a
 18
      continuous string of six numbers.
 19   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.



Modifying an Offset Aimpoint
 1    ICP LIST Button – Press.
 2    ICP Keypad – Press 1/T-ILS to display the DEST UTM DED page.
 3    ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to cycle to the DEST DIR DED page (P2>).
      ICP Keypad – Input the steerpoint number.
 4    or
      ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the steerpoint number.
 5    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
 6    ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to cycle to the DEST OA1 page (P3>) or the DEST OA2 page (P4>).
 7    ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around RNG data field.
 8    ICP Keypad – Input the offset aimpoint range from the steerpoint in feet.
 9    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 10   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around BRG data field.
      ICP Keypad – Input the offset aimpoint true bearing from the steerpoint in DD.D° or DDD.D° format,
 11
      which is input as either DDD or DDDD in a continuous string of numbers.
 12   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 13   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around ELEV data field.
 14   ICP Keypad – Input the offset aimpoint elevation in feet.
 15   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
                                                                                                Return to
                                                                                              Checklist index
Converting MGRS to Latitude/Longitude (Steerpoints 21-25 only)
 1    ICP LIST Button – Press.
 2    ICP Keypad – Press 1/T-ILS to display the DEST UTM DED page.
      ICP Keypad – Input the steerpoint number.
 3    or
      ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the steerpoint number.
 4    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
 5    ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around GRID data field.
 6    ICP Keypad – Input the 2-digit grid zone.
 7    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 8    ICP Increment/Decrement rocker – Select the letter of the grid zone designator.
 9    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 10   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around SQUARE data field.
 11   ICP Increment/Decrement rocker – Select the first letter of the square as necessary.
 12   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 13   ICP Increment/Decrement rocker – Select the second letter of the square as necessary.
 14   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 15   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around EAST/NORTH data field.
 16   ICP Keypad – Input the 10-digit easting and northing as a continuous string.
 17   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 18   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around ELEV data field.
 19   ICP Keypad – Input the elevation in feet.
 20   ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 21   ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around CNVRT data field.
      ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to initiate the conversion to Latitude/Longitude format.
 22   When the conversion is complete, the DED asterisks will be placed around the steerpoint data field
      automatically.
                                                                                                   Return to
                                                                                                 Checklist index
Storing a Markpoint using HUD
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select HUD in the sensor option data field.
 3   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the Mark Cue to the desired location within the HUD.
 4   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to ground stabilize the Mark Cue.
 5   (Optional) RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Adjust the Mark Cue, as necessary.
     TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate the location as a markpoint.
 6   or
     TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to cage the Mark Cue to the HUD FPM without designating a markpoint.



Storing a Markpoint using HMCS
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select HUD in the sensor option data field.
 3   TMS Forward-Long (Stick) – Press to select the HMCS as SOI.
 4   Place the HMCS Aiming Cross over the desired location by head movement.
 5   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to ground stabilize the Mark Cue.
 6   (Optional) RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Adjust the Mark Cue, as necessary.
     TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate the location as a markpoint.
     or
 7
     TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to cage the Mark Cue to the HMCS Aiming Cross without designating a
     markpoint.



Storing a Markpoint using FCR
 1   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the FCR as SOI on the applicable MFD.
 2   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the FCR crosshairs to the desired location.
 3   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the FCR to Fixed Target Track (FTT).
     ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
 4   NOTE: If the FCR is already in FTT when the MARK DED page is displayed, the sensor option is
     automatically set to “FCR” and step 5 is not required.
 5   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select FCR in the sensor option data field, if necessary.
     TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate the FTT location as a markpoint.
 6   or
     TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject Fixed Target Track (FTT) without designating the markpoint.
                                                                                                      Return to
                                                                                                    Checklist index
Storing a Markpoint using TGP
 1   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the TGP as SOI on the applicable MFD.
 2   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the TGP line-of-sight crosshairs to the desired location.
 3   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the TGP to POINT track.
     ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
 4   NOTE: If the TGP is already in POINT track when the MARK DED page is displayed, the sensor option
     is automatically set to “TGP” and step 5 is not required.
 5   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select TGP in the sensor option data field, if necessary.
 6   (Optional) LASER ARM Switch (MISC panel) – Set to LASER ARM position, if necessary.
 7   (Optional) Trigger (Stick) – Pull and hold to gain accurate range data.
     TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate the TGP location as a markpoint.
 8   or
     TMS Right-Short (Stick) – Press to switch to AREA track without designating the markpoint.
 9   Trigger (Stick) – Release.



Storing a Markpoint using OFLY
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 7/MARK.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select OFLY in the sensor option data field.
 3   Maneuver the aircraft as necessary to ensure the flight path will take it over the intended location.
     TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to designate the location as a markpoint as the aircraft passes
 4
     overhead the intended location.
                                                                                                         Return to
                                                                                                       Checklist index
Tuning a TACAN Station
 1    ICP Keypad – Press 1/T-ILS.
 2    ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the desired TACAN mode of operation, as necessary.
 3    ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around CHAN data field.
 4    ICP Keypad – Input the TACAN channel (1-126), which is input with no leading zeros.
 5    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 6    ICP Keypad – Press 0/M-SEL as necessary to toggle the band between X and Y.
      ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the selected TACAN band or RCL to reject it.
 7    Verify the BCN data field displays the correct 3-character identifier for the TACAN station that is intended
      to be used for navigation.
      (A/A TR mode only) ICP DCS Switch – RTN to display the CNI page as desired to view the distance
 8
      measurement to the paired TACAN receiver.
 9    EHSI Instrument Mode Selector Button – Press as necessary to select TCN mode.
      EHSI Course Set/Brightness Knob – Rotate as necessary to set the desired course to/from the selected
 10
      TACAN station.



Tuning an ILS Localizer
 1    ILS Knob (AUDIO 2 control panel) – Rotate clockwise out of the OFF position as necessary.
 2    ICP Keypad – Press 1/T-ILS. Verify the ILS status data field displays ILS ON.
 3    ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around FRQ data field.
      ICP Keypad – Input the localizer frequency, which is input as a continuous string of five numbers with
 4
      no leading zeros.
 5    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it.
 6    ICP DCS Switch – Down to move DED asterisks around CRS data field.
 7    ICP Keypad – Input the approach course, which is input as degrees magnetic with no leading zeros.
 8    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the selected TACAN band or RCL to reject it.
 9    EHSI Instrument Mode Selector Button – Press as necessary to select NAV/PLS or TCN/PLS mode.
      EHSI Course Set/Brightness Knob – Rotate as necessary to set the desired course to/from the selected
 10
      TACAN station.
                                                                                                      Return to
                                                                                                    Checklist index
Performing an In-flight INS Alignment (with GPS-aiding)
       Establish level flight at a constant heading, altitude, and airspeed using backup instruments; or remain
 1
       stationary on the ground.
 2     INS Knob – IN FLT ALIGN.
 3     (Optional) ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to display the INS page and monitor the alignment status.


When “ALIGN” is replaced by “NAV” in the HUD, the alignment is complete.

 4     INS Knob – NAV.



Performing an In-flight INS Alignment (without GPS-aiding)
       Establish level flight at a constant heading, altitude, and airspeed using backup instruments; or remain
 1
       stationary on the ground.
 2     INS Knob – IN FLT ALIGN.
 3     ICP Keypad – Input the current magnetic heading of the aircraft, without leading zeros.
 4     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the data or RCL to reject it and input different data.
 5     ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to display the INS page and monitor the alignment status.
 6     ICP DCS Switch – RTN when the alignment state reaches 75.
 7     ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX. Perform a position fix using the FCR or TGP to attain position/velocity data.


When “MAN” is replaced by “NAV” in the HUD, the alignment is complete.

 8     INS Knob – NAV.
                                                                                                      Return to
                                                                                                    Checklist index
Performing a Position Fix using HUD
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select HUD in the sensor option data field.
 3   DMS Forward-Short – Press to select the HUD as SOI.
 4   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the Diamond symbol to the correct location.
 5   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the position delta and update the INS position.



Performing a Position Fix using FCR
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select FCR in the sensor option data field.
 3   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the FCR as SOI on the applicable MFD.
 4   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the FCR crosshairs to the correct location.
 5   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the FCR to Fixed Target Track (FTT).
 6   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the position delta and update the INS position.



Performing a Position Fix using TGP
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select TGP in the sensor option data field.
 3   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the TGP as SOI on the applicable MFD.
 4   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the TGP line-of-sight crosshairs to the correct location.
 5   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the TGP to POINT track.
 6   (Optional) LASER ARM Switch (MISC panel) – Set to LASER ARM position, if necessary.
 7   (Optional) Trigger (Stick) – Pull and hold to gain accurate range data.
 8   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the position delta and update the INS position.
 9   Trigger (Stick) – Release.



Performing a Position Fix using OFLY
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 8/FIX.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select OFLY in the sensor option data field.
 3   Maneuver the aircraft as necessary to ensure the flight path will take it over steerpoint location.
 4   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to freeze the position delta when overhead the steerpoint location.
 5   (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject the frozen position delta, if necessary.
 6   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the position delta and update the INS position.
                                                                                                      Return to
                                                                                                    Checklist index
Performing an Altitude Calibration using RALT
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 9/A-CAL.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to switch the ACAL DED page to MAN sub-mode, if necessary.
 3   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the type of update to be performed (ALT, BOTH, or POS).
 4   ICP Keypad – Press any button 1-9 to select RALT in the sensor option data field.
 5   Maneuver the aircraft as necessary to ensure the flight path will take it over the steerpoint location.
 6   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to freeze the altitude/position delta(s) when overhead the location.
     (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject the frozen altitude/position delta(s), return to step
 7
     5, and attempt another overflight if necessary.
 8   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the altitude/position delta(s) and update the INS-only altitude/position.



Performing an Altitude Calibration using FCR
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 9/A-CAL.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to switch the ACAL DED page to MAN sub-mode, if necessary.
 3   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the type of update to be performed (ALT, BOTH, or POS).
 4   ICP Keypad – Press any button 1-9 to select FCR in the sensor option data field.
 5   DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the FCR as SOI on the applicable MFD.
 6   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the FCR crosshairs to the correct location (10 NM limit).
 7   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the FCR to Fixed Target Track (FTT).
     (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject Fixed Target Track, return to step 6, and adjust the
 8
     FCR crosshairs if necessary.
 9   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the altitude/position delta(s) and update the INS-only altitude/position.



Performing an Altitude Calibration using HUD
 1   ICP Keypad – Press 9/A-CAL.
 2   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to switch the ACAL DED page to MAN sub-mode, if necessary.
 3   ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the type of update to be performed (ALT, BOTH, or POS).
 4   ICP Keypad – Press any button 1-9 to select HUD in the sensor option data field.
 5   DMS Forward-Short – Press to select the HUD as SOI.
 6   RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the Diamond symbol to the correct location.
 7   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to freeze the altitude/position delta(s).
     (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject the frozen altitude/position delta(s), return to step
 8
     6, and adjust the Diamond symbol if necessary.
 9   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the altitude/position delta(s) and update the INS-only altitude/position.
                                                                                                   Return to
                                                                                                 Checklist index
Performing an Altitude Calibration using TGP
 1    ICP Keypad – Press 9/A-CAL.
 2    ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to switch the ACAL DED page to MAN sub-mode, if necessary.
 3    ICP DCS Switch – SEQ to select the type of update to be performed (ALT, BOTH, or POS).
 4    ICP Keypad – Press any button 1-9 to select TGP in the sensor option data field.
 5    DMS Aft-Short – Press as necessary to select the TGP as SOI on the applicable MFD.
 6    RDR CURSOR/ENABLE switch (Throttle) – Slew the TGP line-of-sight crosshairs to the correct location.
 7    TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to switch the TGP to POINT track.
 8    (Optional) LASER ARM Switch (MISC panel) – Set to LASER ARM position, if necessary.
 9    (Optional) Trigger (Stick) – Pull and hold to gain accurate range data.
 10   TMS Forward-Short (Stick) – Press to freeze the altitude/position delta(s).
 11   Trigger (Stick) – Release.
      (Optional) TMS Aft-Short (Stick) – Press to reject POINT track, return to step 6, and adjust the TGP
 12
      line-of-sight crosshairs if necessary.
 13   ICP Keypad – ENTR to accept the altitude/position delta(s) and update the INS-only altitude/position.
                                                                                                        Return to
                                                                                                      Checklist index
Radio Communications
Abbreviated checklists for tuning the radios to preset or manual frequencies via the UFC or backup control panel.


Tuning a Preset Frequency (Upfront Controls)
       ICP COM 1 Button – Press to access the UHF DED page.
 1     or
       ICP COM 2 Button – Press to access the VHF DED page.
 2     ICP Keypad - Input the 1- or 2-digit preset channel number (1-20).
 3     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the channel number or RCL to reject it.


If the applicable radio is already tuned to a preset channel, the radio may be cycled incrementally through the
20 preset channels on the CNI DED page.

       ICP DCS Switch – Up/Down to move the Increment/Decrement symbol adjacent to the UHF or VHF
 1
       data field, as necessary.
 2     ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Press as necessary to select the desired preset channel.



Editing a Preset Frequency (Upfront Controls)
       ICP COM 1 Button – Press to access the UHF DED page.
 1     or
       ICP COM 2 Button – Press to access the VHF DED page.
       ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the preset channel to be edited. (Skip to step 5)
 2     or
       ICP DCS Switch – Up/Down to move the DED Asterisks around the Preset Channel Number data field.
 3     ICP Keypad - Input the 1- or 2-digit preset channel number (1-20) to be edited.
 4     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the channel number or RCL to reject it.
       ICP DCS Switch – Up/Down to move the DED Asterisks around the Preset Channel Frequency data
 5
       field.
 6     ICP Keypad - Input the 4- or 5-digit frequency in a continuous string without leading zeros.
 7     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the frequency or RCL to reject it.



Tuning a Manual Frequency (Upfront Controls)
       ICP COM 1 Button – Press to access the UHF DED page.
 1     or
       ICP COM 2 Button – Press to access the VHF DED page.
 2     ICP Keypad - Input the 4- or 5-digit frequency in a continuous string without leading zeros.
 3     ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the frequency or RCL to reject it.
                                                                                                  Return to
                                                                                                Checklist index
Tuning a Preset frequency (UHF Backup control panel)
 1   Function Knob – Set to MAIN or BOTH.
 2   Mode Knob – Set to PRESET.
 3   CHAN Knob – Rotate until the desired preset channel is displayed in the CHAN Display indicator.
     (Optional) STATUS Button – Press to verify the frequency assigned to the selected preset channel
 4
     within the FREQUENCY STATUS/DISPLAY indicator.



Tuning a Manual Frequency (UHF Backup control panel)
 1   Function Knob – Set to MAIN or BOTH.
 2   Mode Knob – Set to MNL.
     A-3-2 Knob – Rotate until the first digit of the desired frequency is displayed in the FREQUENCY
 3
     STATUS/DISPLAY indicator.
     Manual Frequency Knobs – Rotate until the remaining four digits of the desired frequency are
 4
     displayed in the FREQUENCY STATUS/DISPLAY indicator.
                                                                                                 Return to
                                                                                               Checklist index
Combat Employment
Abbreviated checklist for performing pre-combat checks.


Performing Pre-Combat Checks

                  1.   Total fuel quantity – Check.
                  2.   FUEL QTY SEL knob – Check balance between tanks.
 Fuel
                  3.   ENGINE FEED knob – Set to NORM.
                  4.   TANK INERTING switch – Set to TANK INERTING.

                  5.   TACAN – Set A/A T/R settings or configure as necessary.
                  6.   FCR – Set mode and scan volume.
                  7.   RF switch – Set as required.
 Emitters         8.   RWR – Configure as necessary.
                  9.   ECM control panel – Configure as necessary.
                  10. IFF – Set modes & codes; configure as necessary. (N/I)
                  11. EXT LIGHTING control panel – Set MASTER knob to OFF (or as appropriate).

                  12. ICP STPT/DEST pages – Verify steerpoint data.
 Navigation       13. NAV page – Verify SYS ACCUR and GPS ACCUR are HIGH.
                  14. FIX/A-CAL pages – Perform updates as necessary.

                  15. CMDS settings – Configure as necessary on CMDS control panel and CMDS DED page.
                  16. CMDS MODE knob – Set to MAN, SEMI, or AUTO as required.
 Chaff/Flares
                  17. CMS switch – Press to Aft position to confirm consent in SEMI/AUTO modes; or press
                      to Right position to revoke consent in SEMI/AUTO modes.

                  18. SMS – Check weapon profiles and settings in each master mode (AAM, A-G, MSL, DGFT)
                  19. MASTER ARM switch – Set as required.
                  20. LASER ARM switch – Set as required.
 Employment       21. HUD control panel – Configure as desired; confirm correct symbology and indications
                      are displayed.
                  22. AUDIO 1 & AUDIO 2 control panels - Set volume levels as desired.
                  23. SOI – Confirm or set as desired.
                                                                                                        Return to
                                                                                                      Checklist index
Designating the IP using Direct Overflight
      ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the VIP steerpoint number.
 1    or
      ICP Keypad – Press 4/STPT to display the STPT DED page.
 2    ICP Keypad – Input the VIP steerpoint number.
 3    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
 4    ICP A-G Button – Press to enter A-G master mode.
 5    MFD format – Select SMS.
 6    SMS OSB 6 – Select weapon, as desired.
 7    SMS OSB 2 – Select pre-planned weapon delivery sub-mode, as desired.
 8    DMS Forward – Press to set SOI to HUD, if necessary.
 9    Visually acquire the physical landmark that corresponds with the Initial Point (IP) location.
 10   Maneuver the aircraft as necessary for a direct overflight of the IP location.
 11   TMS Forward-Short – Press when directly over the landmark at the IP location.



Designating the RP using Direct Overflight
      ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the VRP steerpoint number.
 1    or
      ICP Keypad – Press 4/STPT to display the STPT DED page.
 2    ICP Keypad – Input the VRP steerpoint number.
 3    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
 4    ICP A-G Button – Press to enter A-G master mode.
 5    MFD format – Select SMS.
 6    SMS OSB 6 – Select weapon, as desired.
 7    SMS OSB 2 – Select pre-planned weapon delivery sub-mode, as desired.
 8    DMS Forward – Press to set SOI to HUD, if necessary.
 9    Visually acquire the physical landmark that corresponds with the Reference Point (RP) location.
 10   Maneuver the aircraft as necessary for a direct overflight of the RP location.
 11   TMS Forward-Short – Press when directly over the landmark at the RP location
                                                                                                Return to
                                                                                              Checklist index
Aligning the RP using VRP Cursor Slew
      ICP Increment/Decrement Rocker – Select the VRP steerpoint number.
 1    or
      ICP Keypad – Press 4/STPT to display the STPT DED page.
 2    ICP Keypad – Input the VRP steerpoint number.
 3    ICP Keypad – Press ENTR to accept the steerpoint number or RCL to reject it.
 4    ICP A-G Button – Press to enter A-G master mode.
 5    MFD format – Select SMS.
 6    SMS OSB 6 – Select weapon, as desired.
 7    SMS OSB 2 – Select pre-planned weapon delivery sub-mode, as desired.
 8    DMS Forward – Press to set SOI to HUD, if necessary.
      (Optional) TMS Right – Press as necessary to sequence the sighting point rotary to Reference Point
 9
      (RP).
 10   Visually acquire the physical landmark that corresponds with the RP location.
      RDR CURSOR/ENABLE Switch – Slew the VRP cursor as necessary to align the Diamond symbol over the
 11
      RP location.
 12   TMS Right – Press to sequence the sighting point rotary to TGT, if necessary.
APPENDIX B – ALIC CODES & RWR SYMBOLS
The Aircraft Launcher Interface Computer (ALIC) codes listed under the “ID” column in the Air Defense and Naval
Radar Systems tables can be used on the HARM DED page or HTS DED page to program custom threat tables
for the AGM-88 HARM or HARM Targeting System radar signal scans.
The threat radar codes under the “RWR” column correspond with how the threat radar will appear on the ALR-
56M Threat Warning Azimuth Indicator, the MFD HARM Attack Display (HAD) format, or the MFD Weapon (WPN)
format when the AGM-88 weapon profile is selected.
Air defense radar systems are further identified by their type. The table below lists the definition of each “Type”
abbreviation to identify the radar’s function within their respective air defense units.

 TYPE      DESCRIPTION                                      TYPE     DESCRIPTION
 CWAR      Continuous-Wave Acquisition Radar                STR      Search and Tracking Radar
 EWR       Early Warning Radar                              TAR      Target Acquisition Radar
 FCR       Fire Control Radar                               TI       Target Illumination
 RR        Ranging Radar                                    TTR      Target Tracking Radar
 SR        Surveillance Radar




Air Defense Radar Systems
  ID    RWR     NATO SYSTEM                 SYSTEM                 RADAR DESIGNATION                 TYPE
   -                                                               1L13 “BOX SPRING”                 SR / EWR
   -                                                               5G66 “TALL RACK”                  SR / EWR
 122            SA-2 / SA-3 / SA-5          S-75 / S-125 / S-200   P-19 “FLAT FACE B”                SR / TAR
 126            SA-2 “GUIDLELINE”           S-75                   SNR-75 “FAN SONG”                 TTR
                SA-2 “GUIDLELINE”           S-75                   RD-75 Amazonka                    RR
 123            SA-3 “GOA”                  S-125                  SNR-125 “LOW BLOW”                TTR
 129            SA-5 “GAMMON”               S-200                  5N62 “SQUARE PAIR”                TTR / TI
 108            SA-6 “GAINFUL”              2K12 Kub               1S91 “STRAIGHT FLUSH”             TAR / TI
 117            SA-8 “GECKO”                9K33 Osa               “LAND ROLL”                       TAR / TTR
 130            SA-5 / SA-10                S-200 / S-300          ST-68U “TIN SHIELD”               TAR
 104            SA-10 “GRUMBLE”             S-300PS                64N6E “BIG BIRD”                  TAR
 103            SA-10 “GRUMBLE”             S-300PS                5N66M “CLAM SHELL”                TAR
 110            SA-10 “GRUMBLE”             S-300PS                30N6E “FLAP LID”                  TTR
 107            SA-11 “GADFLY”              9K37M Buk-M1           9S18M1 “SNOW DRIFT”               TAR
 115            SA-11 “GADFLY”              9K37M Buk-M1           9S35 “FIRE DOME”                  TTR
 109                                        PPRU-M1                9S80M1 “DOG EAR”                  TAR
 118            SA-13 “GOPHER”              9K35 Strela-10M3       9S86 “SNAP SHOT”                  RR
 119            SA-15 “GAUNTLET”            9K331 Tor-M1           “SCRUM HALF”                      TAR / TTR
 120         SA-19 “GRISON”           2S6M Tunguska              1RL144 “HOT SHOT”                     TAR / TTR
 131                                  S-60 / KS-19               SON-9 “FIRE CAN”                      FCR
 121                                  ZSU-23-4 Shilka            RPK-2 “GUN DISH”                      FCR
 128         CSA-7 / HQ-7B            Hóng Qí-7                  HQ-7 ACU                              TAR
 127         CSA-7 / HQ-7B            Hóng Qí-7                  Type 345                              TTR
  -                                                              AN/FPS-117 “SEEK IGLOO”               SR / EWR
 203         MIM-23B I-Hawk                                      AN/MPQ-50                             TAR
 204         MIM-23B I-Hawk                                      AN/MPQ-46                             TTR
 206         MIM-23B I-Hawk                                      AN/MPQ-55                             CWAR
 202         MIM-104C Patriot PAC-2                              AN/MPQ-53                             STR
 209         NASAMS 2                                            AN/MPQ-64F1 Sentinel                  STR
 208         M163 Vulcan ADS                                     AN/VPS-2                              RR
             LPWS C-RAM                                          AN/TPQ-36                             FCR
 124         Rapier FSA                                          DN 181 Blindfire                      TTR
 125         Rapier FSA                                          Rapier PU                             SR
 205         Roland TÜR                                          MPDR-3002S                            SR
 201         Marder Roland                                       MPDR-16 / DOMINO-30                   TAR / TTR
 207         Flakpanzer Gepard                                   MPDR-12 / Albis                       TAR / FCR



Naval Radar Systems
 ID    RWR   SHIP CLASS                 TYPE                                 DESIGNATION
 301         Kuznetsov class            Heavy Aircraft Cruiser               Project 1143.5 (Admiral Kuznetsov)
 320         Kuznetsov class            Heavy Aircraft Cruiser               Project 1143.5 [2017 SC revision]
 313         Kirov class                Guided Missile Cruiser               Project 1144.2 (Piotr Velikiy)
 303         Slava class                Guided Missile Cruiser               Project 1164 (Moskva)
 319         Neutrashimy class          Guided Missile Frigate               Project 11540 (Neutrashimy)
 309         Krivak II class            Frigate / Guard Ship                 Project 1135M (Rezky)
 306         Grisha class               Anti-Submarine Corvette              Project 1124.4 (Grisha)
 312         Tarantul III class         Missile Corvette                     Project 1241.1 (Molniya)
 321         Ropucha I class            Large Landing Ship                   Project 775
 410         Luyang II class            Guided Missile Destroyer             Type 052C (PLAN)
 409         Luyang I class             Guided Missile Destroyer             Type 052B (PLAN)
 411         Jiangkai II class          Guided Missile Frigate               Type 054A (PLAN)
 408         Yuzhao class               Amphibious Transport Dock            Type 071 (PLAN)
 403         Nimitz class               Aircraft Carrier                     CVN-71 (USS Theodore Roosevelt)
 404         Nimitz class               Aircraft Carrier                     CVN-72 (USS Abraham Lincoln)
 405           Nimitz class                  Aircraft Carrier               CVN-73 (USS George Washington)
 406           Nimitz class                  Aircraft Carrier               CVN-74 (USS John C. Stennis)
 413           Nimitz class                  Aircraft Carrier               CVN-75 (USS Harry S. Truman)
               Forrestal class               Aircraft Carrier               CV-59 (USS Forrestal)
 407           Tarawa class                  Amphibious Assault Ship        LHA-1 (USS Tarawa)
 315           Ticonderoga class             Guided Missile Cruiser         CG (USS)
 412           Arleigh Burke class           Guided Missile Destroyer       DDG (USS)
 401           Oliver Hazard Perry class     Guided Missile Frigate         FFG (USS)
               Invincible class              Light Aircraft Carrier         R05 (HMS)
               Leander class                 Frigate                        F12, F57, F72 (HMS)
               Condell class                 Frigate                        PFG-06, PFG-07 (CNS)



Airborne Radar Systems
RWR    AIRCRAFT                        RWR     AIRCRAFT                         RWR   AIRCRAFT
       MiG-19                                  JF-17                                  F-4
       MiG-21                                  J-11                                   F-5
       MiG-23                                  KJ-2000                                F-14
       Su-24                                                                          F-15
       MiG-25                                  Mirage F1                              F-16
       MiG-29                                  Mirage 2000                            F/A-18
       Su-27                                   Tornado GR4                            E-2
       Su-33                                   Tornado IDS                            E-3
       Su-30                                   AJS37
       MiG-31
       Su-34
       A-50



Other Threat Symbols
 RWR   TYPE                                THREATS
       Missile radar seeker detected       Active radar-homing missiles (ARH)
APPENDIX C – HAD / WPN THREAT TABLES
The threat radar codes under the “HAD” column correspond with how the threat radar will appear on the MFD
HARM Attack Display (HAD) format if the corresponding threat class is enabled within the HTS scan cycles.
The HAD Manual threat Class is programmable via the HTS DED page and can include up to eight threat radar
types. This can be used to better tailor the HTS scan cycles to the radar signals that are anticipated to be
encountered during the mission.


HARM Attack Display (HAD) Threat Classes
 HAD     HAD CLASS 1                 HAD     HAD CLASS 2                 HAD     HAD CLASS 3
   TS    SA-5 “TIN SHIELD”             S     P-19 “FLAT FACE B”           DE     PPRU-M1 “DOG EAR”
   BB    SA-10 “BIG BIRD”              2     SA-2 “FAN SONG”               19    SA-19 “HOT SHOT”
   CS    SA-10 “CLAM SHELL”            3     SA-3 “LOW BLOW”               FC    SON-9 “FIRE CAN”
   10    SA-10 “FLAP LID”              5     SA-5 “SQUARE PAIR”            A     ZSU-23-4 “GUN DISH”
   SD    SA-11 “SNOW DRIFT”            6     SA-6 “STRAIGHT FLUSH”
   11    SA-11 “FIRE DOME”             8     SA-8 “LAND ROLL”
   15    SA-15 “SCRUM HALF”            13    SA-13 “SNAP SHOT”
  HQ     HQ-7 ACU
   7     HQ-7 Type 345


 HAD     HAD CLASS 4                 HAD     HAD CLASS 5                 HAD     HAD CLASS 6
                                      SW     Kuznetsov-class               P     MIM-104C Patriot PAC-2
                                      HN     Kirov/Luyang II-class        NS     NASAMS 2 “Sentinel”
                                       T2    Slava-class
                                      HP     Neutrashimy/Grisha-class
                                       TP    Krivak II-class
                                      MR     Luyang I/Jiangkai-class
                                       PS    Tarantul III/Yuzhao-class
                                       SC    Ropucha I-class


 HAD     HAD CLASS 7                 HAD     HAD CLASS 8                 HAD     HAD CLASS 9
  HK     MIM-23B I-Hawk                A     M163 Vulcan ADS
  RO     Roland TÜR                    A     Flakpanzer Gepard
  RO     Marder Roland
   RP    Rapier FSA “Blindfire”
   RT    Rapier FSA
 HAD     HAD CLASS 10                HAD    HAD CLASS 11                 HAD    HAD MANUAL CLASS
   SS    Nimitz-class
   AE    AN/SPY-1 “Aegis”
   49    Oliver Hazard Perry-class
   40    Tarawa-class


The emitter codes under the “WPN” column correspond with how the threat radar will appear on the MFD Weapon
(WPN) format when the corresponding threat table is selected.
Each HARM threat table can be modified using the HARM DED page. This can be used to better tailor the AGM-
88 scans to the radar signals that are anticipated to be encountered during the mission.


AGM-88 Weapon (WPN) Threat Tables
         TBL1                               TBL2                                TBL3
 WPN                                 WPN                                WPN
         (MODERN SAM SYSTEMS)               (AAA & SHORAD)                      (OLDER SAM SYSTEMS )
   10    SA-10 “FLAP LID”             19    SA-19 “HOT SHOT”              3     SA-3 “LOW BLOW”
   BB    SA-10 “BIG BIRD”             15    SA-15 “SCRUM HALF”            S     P-19 “FLAT FACE”
   CS    SA-10 “CLAM SHELL”            8    SA-8 “LAND ROLL”              6     SA-6 “STRAIGHT FLUSH”
   11    SA-11 “FIRE DOME”             A    ZSU-23-4 “GUN DISH”           2     SA-2 “FAN SONG”
   SD    SA-11 “SNOW DRIFT”           DE    PPRU-M1 “DOG EAR”             13    SA-13 “SNAP SHOT”
APPENDIX D – HOTAS QUICK REFERENCES
             AAM, MSL ORIDE, DGFT Master Modes / SOI set to FCR


                           RWS/TWS Designate Target
                           ACM Boresight Mode
                           RWS Spotlight Mode                                                                 Missile Step
                                                                                                              Cycle A-A Missile Type
    IFF Interrogate All                                    RWS/TWS Target Step
                                                           ACM HUD Mode
    IFF Interrogate FCR LOS
                                                           (>1 sec) Toggle between
    STT NCTR Scan
                                                           RWS/TWS Modes                              Set SOI to HUD


                            RWS/TWS Target Reject
                            ACM Vertical Mode                                                                                Cycle Right
                                                                                     Cycle Left
                                                                                     MFD Format                              MFD Format




                                                                                                  Set SOI to MFD from HUD
                   Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4                                                 Swap SOI between MFDs
                                                                                                  Toggle HDU On/Off
                                               MAN Deactivate ECM Mode 3
    Dispense 1x                                SEMI Disable ECM Mode 1/2
    Manual Program 6
                                               AUTO Disable Dispensing of Automatic Programs


     MAN Activate ECM Mode 3                                                                                Cycle FCR EXP Modes
     SEMI Dispense 1x Auto Program/Enable ECM Mode 1/2
                                                                                                            Display HSD ZOOM Mode
     AUTO Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Programs




                                                                                                                 Select Dogfight Mode
                Transmit over VHF Radio

                                          Cycle Datalink                                                         Return to previous Mode
 Toggle Datalink                          Filters on FCR
                                                                                                                 Select Missile Override Mode
 Info on FCR                              Transmit STPT, SPI, or
                                          SEAD Target over Datalink     TGP Manual Zoom            Uncage AIM-9 Seeker

                Transmit over UHF Radio




 Short press (<0.5 sec)                                                                                       FCR Antenna Elevation

 Long press (>0.5 sec)
                                                                            Slew FCR Cursor             Swap AIM-9 BORE/SLAVE Modes
 Continuous press
                                 A-G Master Mode / SOI set to FCR



                               Designate Target                                                             Cycle CCIP-DTOS-CCRP
                                                                                                            Missile Step

                                                                                                            Missile Step
                                                         Cycle Sighting
                                                         Point Rotary
                                                                                                    Set SOI to HUD


                                 Target Reject

                                                                                   Cycle Left                              Cycle Right
                                                                                   MFD Format                              MFD Format




                                                                                                Set SOI to MFD from HUD
                  Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4                                                Swap SOI between MFDs
                                                                                                Toggle HDU On/Off
                                             MAN Deactivate ECM Mode 3
   Dispense 1x
                                             SEMI Disable ECM Mode 1/2
   Manual Program 6
                                             AUTO Disable Dispensing of Automatic Programs


    MAN Activate ECM Mode 3                                                                               Cycle FCR EXP/DBS Modes
    SEMI Dispense 1x Auto Program/Enable ECM Mode 1/2
                                                                                                          Display HSD ZOOM Mode
    AUTO Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Programs




                                                                                                               Select Dogfight Mode
              Transmit over VHF Radio
                                                                                                               Return to previous Mode
                                        Cycle Datalink
Toggle Datalink                         Filters on FCR
                                                                                                               Select Missile Override Mode
Info on FCR                             Transmit STPT, SPI, or
                                        SEAD Target over Datalink         TGP Manual Zoom

              Transmit over UHF Radio




Short press (<0.5 sec)       Short press, AGM-65 selected                                                   FCR Antenna Elevation

Long press (>0.5 sec)        Short press, AGM-88 selected
                                                                             Slew FCR Cursor          Cycle AGM-65 PRE/VIS/BORE Modes
Continuous press
                                 A-G Master Mode / SOI set to HUD

                         VRP/VIP Designate RP/IP

                         DTOS/VIS Designate Target
                         Set SOI to HMCS from HUD                                                           Cycle CCIP-DTOS-CCRP
                                                                                                            Missile Step
                                                                                                            Missile Step
                                                         Cycle Sighting
                                                         Point Rotary
                                                                                                    Set SOI to HUD


                         DTOS/VIS Target Reject
                         Set SOI to HUD from HMCS
                                                                                   Cycle Left                              Cycle Right
                                                                                   MFD Format                              MFD Format




                                                                                                Set SOI to MFD from HUD
                                                                                                Swap SOI between MFDs
                  Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4
                                                                                                Toggle HDU On/Off
                                             MAN Deactivate ECM Mode 3
   Dispense 1x
                                             SEMI Disable ECM Mode 1/2
   Manual Program 6
                                             AUTO Disable Dispensing of Automatic Programs


    MAN Activate ECM Mode 3                                                                               Display HSD ZOOM Mode
    SEMI Dispense 1x Auto Program/Enable ECM Mode 1/2
    AUTO Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Programs




                                                                                                               Select Dogfight Mode
              Transmit over VHF Radio

                                        Cycle Datalink                                                         Return to previous Mode
Toggle Datalink                         Filters on FCR
                                                                                                               Select Missile Override Mode
Info on FCR                             Transmit STPT, SPI, or
                                        SEAD Target over Datalink         TGP Manual Zoom

              Transmit over UHF Radio




Short press (<0.5 sec)        Short press, AGM-65 selected                                                  FCR Antenna Elevation

Long press (>0.5 sec)         Short press, AGM-88 selected
                                                                             DTOS/VIS                 Cycle AGM-65 PRE/VIS/BORE Modes
Continuous press              Short press, VRP/VIP mode                      Slew HUD TD Box
                                 A-G Master Mode / SOI set to HSD



                               Designate Symbol                                                       Cycle CCIP-DTOS-CCRP
                                                                                                      Missile Step

                                                                                                      Missile Step


                                                                                              Set SOI to HUD


                               Drop Designation

                                                                             Cycle Left                              Cycle Right
                                                                             MFD Format                              MFD Format




                                                                                          Set SOI to MFD from HUD
                  Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4                                          Swap SOI between MFDs
                                                                                          Toggle HDU On/Off
                                             MAN Deactivate ECM Mode 3
   Dispense 1x
                                             SEMI Disable ECM Mode 1/2
   Manual Program 6
                                             AUTO Disable Dispensing of Automatic Programs


    MAN Activate ECM Mode 3                                                                         Cycle HSD EXP Modes
    SEMI Dispense 1x Auto Program/Enable ECM Mode 1/2
                                                                                                    Display HSD ZOOM Mode
    AUTO Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Programs




                                                                                                         Select Dogfight Mode
              Transmit over VHF Radio
                                                                                                         Return to previous Mode
                                        Cycle Datalink
Toggle Datalink                         Filters on FCR
                                                                                                         Select Missile Override Mode
Info on FCR                             Transmit STPT, SPI, or
                                        SEAD Target over Datalink   TGP Manual Zoom

              Transmit over UHF Radio




Short press (<0.5 sec)       Short press, AGM-65 selected                                             FCR Antenna Elevation

Long press (>0.5 sec)        Short press, AGM-88 selected
                                                                       Slew HSD Cursor          Cycle AGM-65 PRE/VIS/BORE Modes
Continuous press
                                 A-G Master Mode / SOI set to HAD



                               Designate Target                                                          Cycle CCIP-DTOS-CCRP
                                                                                                         Missile Step
            Display SEAD
            DED page                                                                                     Missile Step
                                                         Target Step
             Initiate TDOA
             Sequence                                                                            Set SOI to HUD


                               Target Reject
                               Display DED CNI page                             Cycle Left                              Cycle Right
                                                                                MFD Format                              MFD Format




                                                                                             Set SOI to MFD from HUD
                                                                                             Swap SOI between MFDs
                  Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4
                                                                                             Toggle HDU On/Off
                                               MAN Deactivate ECM Mode 3
   Dispense 1x                                 SEMI Disable ECM Mode 1/2
   Manual Program 6
                                               AUTO Disable Dispensing of Automatic Programs


    MAN Activate ECM Mode 3
                                                                                                       Cycle HAD EXP Modes
    SEMI Dispense 1x Auto Program/Enable ECM Mode 1/2
                                                                                                       Display HSD ZOOM Mode
    AUTO Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Programs




                                                                                                            Select Dogfight Mode
              Transmit over VHF Radio

                                        Cycle Datalink                                                      Return to previous Mode
Toggle Datalink                         Filters on FCR
                                                                                                            Select Missile Override Mode
Info on FCR                             Transmit STPT, SPI, or
                                        SEAD Target over Datalink      TGP Manual Zoom
              Transmit over UHF Radio




Short press (<0.5 sec)        Short press, AGM-65 selected                                               FCR Antenna Elevation

Long press (>0.5 sec)         Short press, AGM-88 selected
                                                                          Slew HAD Cursor          Cycle AGM-65 PRE/VIS/BORE Modes
Continuous press              Short press, DED SEAD displayed
                                 A-G Master Mode / SOI set to TGP


                         Point Track
                         Point Track/Automatic Handoff
                         to AGM-65D/G in EO-PRE Mode                                                       Cycle CCIP-DTOS-CCRP
                                                                                                           Missile Step
                                                         Area Track                                        Missile Step
        Cycle TV-FLIR
        WHOT-FLIR BHOT                                   Area Track/Manual Handoff to
                                                         AGM-65D/G in EO-PRE Mode
                                                                                                   Set SOI to HUD


                                Slave TGP to SPI
                                Cursor Zero                                                                               Cycle Right
                                                                                  Cycle Left
                                                                                  MFD Format                              MFD Format




                                                                                               Set SOI to MFD from HUD
                  Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4                                               Swap SOI between MFDs
                                                                                               Toggle HDU On/Off
                                              MAN Deactivate ECM Mode 3
   Dispense 1x                                SEMI Disable ECM Mode 1/2
   Manual Program 6
                                              AUTO Disable Dispensing of Automatic Programs


    MAN Activate ECM Mode 3                                                                              Toggle TGP Field-Of-View
    SEMI Dispense 1x Auto Program/Enable ECM Mode 1/2
                                                                                                         Display HSD ZOOM Mode
    AUTO Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Programs




                                                                                                              Select Dogfight Mode
              Transmit over VHF Radio

                                        Cycle Datalink                                                        Return to previous Mode
Toggle Datalink                         Filters on FCR
                                                                                                              Select Missile Override Mode
Info on FCR                             Transmit STPT, SPI, or
                                        SEAD Target over Datalink      TGP Manual Zoom          Toggle TGP Laser Spot Search

              Transmit over UHF Radio




Short press (<0.5 sec)        Short press, AGM-65 selected                                                 FCR Antenna Elevation

Long press (>0.5 sec)         Short press, AGM-88 selected
                                                                           Slew TGP Sen              Cycle AGM-65 PRE/VIS/BORE Modes
Continuous press
                                A-G Master Mode / SOI set to WPN


                               Track Target
                               Track Target                                                              Cycle CCIP-DTOS-CCRP
                                                                                                         Missile Step

 Cycle HARM Threat Table                                                                                 Missile Step
                                                         Target Step
 Toggle HOC/COH
                                                                                                 Set SOI to HUD


                               Target Reject
                               Target Reject                                    Cycle Left                              Cycle Right
                               Slave AGM-65 to SPI or boresight                 MFD Format                              MFD Format




                                                                                             Set SOI to MFD from HUD
                  Dispense 1x Manual Program 1-4                                             Swap SOI between MFDs
                                                                                             Toggle HDU On/Off
                                               MAN Deactivate ECM Mode 3
   Dispense 1x                                 SEMI Disable ECM Mode 1/2
   Manual Program 6
                                               AUTO Disable Dispensing of Automatic Programs


    MAN Activate ECM Mode 3
                                                                                                       Toggle Missile Field-Of-View
    SEMI Dispense 1x Auto Program/Enable ECM Mode 1/2
                                                                                                       Display HSD ZOOM Mode
    AUTO Enable Continuous Dispensing of Auto Programs




                                                                                                            Select Dogfight Mode
              Transmit over VHF Radio

                                        Cycle Datalink                                                      Return to previous Mode

Toggle Datalink                         Filters on FCR
                                                                                                            Select Missile Override Mode
Info on FCR                             Transmit STPT, SPI, or
                                        SEAD Target over Datalink
                                                                       TGP Manual Zoom

              Transmit over UHF Radio




Short press (<0.5 sec)       Short press, AGM-65 selected                                                FCR Antenna Elevation

Long press (>0.5 sec)        Short press, AGM-88 selected
                                                                          Slew AGM-65 Seeker       Cycle AGM-65 PRE/VIS/BORE Modes
Continuous press                                                          Slew AGM-88 Cursor
APPENDIX E – GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Definitions of acronyms, abbreviations, labels, and terms.

A-A, A/A            Air-to-Air

AAA                 Anti-Aircraft Artillery

A-CAL               Altitude Calibration

ACM                 1. Air Combat Mode; 2. Air Combat Maneuvers

ADI                 Attitude Director Indicator

A-G                 Air-to-Ground

AGL                 Above Ground Level

AGM                 Air-to-Ground Missile

AGR                 Air-to-Ground Ranging

AIM                 Air Intercept Missile

ALIC                Aircraft Launcher Interface Computer

ALOW                Altitude Low

ALT                 1. Altitude; 2. Alternate

AMRAAM              Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile

AOA                 1. Angle-Of-Attack; 2. Angle-Of-Arrival

AR                  Aerial Refuel

ATC                 Air Traffic Control

ATT                 Attitude

AUTO                Automatic

AZ                  Azimuth

BFM                 Basic Fighter Maneuvers

BHOT                Black Hot

BI                  Burst Interval

BIT                 Built-In Test

BNGO                Bingo

BORE                Boresight

BQ                  Burst Quantity
BULL       Bullseye

BUP        Backup

BVR        Beyond Visual Range

BYP        Bypass

CBU        Cluster Bomb Unit

CCIP       Continuously Computed Impact Point

CCRP       Continuously Computed Release Point

CH         Chaff

CMDS       Countermeasures Dispenser Set

CMS        Countermeasures Management Switch

CNI        Communications/Navigation/IFF

CNTL       Control

COM1       Communications radio 1; the ARC-164 UHF-AM radio

COM2       Communications radio 2; the ARC-222 VHF-AM/FM radio

CORR       Correction

CRM        Combined Radar Modes

CRUS       Cruise

CTR        Center

CZ         Cursor Zero

DBS        Doppler Beam Sharpening

DEC        Decrement

DED        Data Entry Display

DEFOG      De-Fog

DEPR       Depression

DEST       Destination

DLNK, DL   Datalink

DMS        Display Management Switch

DRNG       Delta Range

DTC        Data Transfer Cartridge
DTE        Data Transfer Equipment

DTOS       1. Dive/Toss; 2. Delta Time-Over-Steerpoint

DTT        Dual Target Track

DTU        Data Transfer Unit

ECM        Electronic Countermeasures

ECS        Environmental Control System

EDR        Endurance

EEGS       Enhanced Envelope Gun Sight

EHSI       Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicator

E-J        Emergency Jettison

ELEV, EL   Elevation

ENG        Engine

ENTR       Enter

EO         Electro-Optical

ETA        Estimated Time of Arrival

ETE        Estimated Time Enroute

EOM        Equations Of Motion

EPU        Emergency Power Unit

EXP        Expand

FCR        Fire Control Radar

FDBK       Feedback

FL         Flight Lead

FLCC       Flight Control Computer

FLCS       Flight Control System

FLIR       Forward Looking Infrared

FLT        Flight

FOV        Field-Of-View

FPM        Flight Path Marker

FTT        Fixed Target Track
FT        Feet (unit of measurement)

FZ        Freeze

G         G-force (unit of measurement)

GBU       Glide Bomb Unit

GM        Ground Mapping

GMT       Ground Moving Target

GPS       Global Positioning System

GRD       GUARD

GS, G/S   1. Ground Speed; 2. Glideslope

HAD       HARM Attack Display

HARM      High-speed Anti-Radiation Missile

HAS       HARM As Sensor

HDG       Heading

HMCS      Helmet-Mounted Cueing System

HOTAS     Hands-On Throttle and Stick System

HOB       High-angle Off-Boresight

HSD       Horizontal Situation Display

HSI       Horizontal Situation Indicator

HTS       HARM Targeting System

HUD       Heads-Up Display

HYD       Hydraulic

IAS       Indicated Airspeed

ICP       Integrated Control Panel

ICS       Inter-Communication System

IDENT     Identification

IFF       Identification Friend or Foe

ILS       Instrument Landing System

IMC       Instrument Meteorological Conditions

IN        Inches (unit of measurement)
INC        Increment

INFLT      In-Flight

INS        Inertial Navigation System

INSM       Inertial Navigation System Memory

INTG       Interrogate

INV        Inventory

JDAM       Joint Direct Attack Munition

JETT       Jettison

JFS        Jet Fuel Starter

JHMCS      Joint Helmet-Mounted Cueing System

JSOW       Joint Stand-Off Weapon

KM         Kilometer (unit of measurement)

LADD       Low Altitude Drogue Delivery

LASR       Laser

LAT        Latitude

Lat/Long   Latitude/Longitude

LB         Pound (unit of measurement)

LGB        Laser-Guided Bomb

LO         Low

LONG       Longitude

LRFD       Laser Rangefinder/Designator

LSS        Laser Spot Search

LST        Laser Spot Tracker

MAGV       Magnetic Variation

MAN        Manual

MFD        Multi-Function Display

MGRS       Military Grid Reference System

MIDS       Multifunction Information Distribution System

MISC       Miscellaneous
M-SEL           Mode Select

MSL             1. Missile; 2. Mean Sea Level

NAV             Navigation

N/I             Not Implemented

NM              Nautical Mile (unit of measurement)

NORM            Normal

NWS             Nose Wheel Steering

NVG             Night Vision Goggles

OAP, OA1, OA2   Offset Aimpoint, Offset Aimpoint 1, Offset Aimpoint 2

OFP             Operational Flight Program

OPR             Operation

PB              Pre-Briefed

PFLD            Pilot Fault List Display

POS             Position

PRE             Pre-planned

PRF             Pulse Repetition Frequency

PRGM, PROG      Program

PSI             Pounds per Square Inch (unit of measurement)

PTT             Push-To-Talk

PUP             Pull-Up Point

PWR             Power

QTY             Quantity

RCL             Recall

RCS             Radar Cross Section

RDY             Ready

REC             Receive

REQCTR          Request Countermeasures

RNG             Range

RTN             Return
RUK          Range Unknown

RWR          Radar Warning Receiver

RWS          Range While Scan

SAI          1. Standby Attitude Indicator; 2. Situational Awareness Indicator

SAM          1. Surface-to-Air Missile, 2. Situation Awareness Mode

SEAD         Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses

SEMI         Semi-automatic

SEQ          Sequence

SI           Salvo Interval

S-J          Selective Jettison

SMDL         Secure Modem Datalink

SMS          Stores Management Set

SNSR         Sensor

SOI          Sensor-Of-Interest

SP           Snowplow

SPI          System-Point-of-Interest

SQ           Salvo Quantity

SQL          Squelch

SSC          Side Stick Controller

STBY         Standby

STN          Source Track Number

STOR         Store

STP, STPT    Steerpoint

STR          Steer

STT          Single Target Track

SYM          Symbology

TACAN, TCN   Tactical Air Navigation

TAS          True Airspeed

TBL          Table
TDOA        Time Difference Of Arrival

TGP         Targeting Pod

TGT         Target

THRT        Threat

T-ILS       TACAN/Instrument Landing System

TMS         Target Management Switch

TNDL        Tactical Net Datalink

TOF         1. Time Of Flight; 2. Time Of Fall

TOT         Time Over Target

T/R         Transmit/Receive

TWS         Track While Scan

UFC         Upfront Controls

UHF         Ultra High Frequency

UTM         Universal Transverse Mercator

VAH         Velocity/Altitude/Heading

VHF         Very High Frequency

VIP         Visual Initial Point

VIS         Visual

VMC         Visual Meteorological Conditions

VRP         Visual Reference Point

VV          Vertical Velocity

VVI         Vertical Velocity Indicator

WCMD        Wind-Corrected Munition Dispenser

WEZ         Weapon Engagement Zone

WHOT        White Hot

WPN         Weapon

WVR         Within Visual Range

XMIT, XMT   Transmit
APPENDIX F – FORMULAS
Use these calculation and conversion formulas for pre-mission planning or while in flight. Desired resultants are
bolded.


Fuel/Endurance Calculations
Bingo Fuel (lbs) = (Time of Flight ÷ 60) × Fuel LB/HR
Objective Time (mins) = ([Total Fuel − Bingo Fuel] ÷ Fuel LB/HR) × 60


Speed/Time/Distance Calculations
Ground Speed Required (knots) = (Distance ÷ Minutes) × 60
Time of Flight (mins) = (Distance ÷ Ground Speed) × 60


Fuel/Range Calculations
Specific Range Factor = Ground Speed ÷ Fuel LB/HR
Flight Range (NM) = Specific Range Factor × Total Fuel


Distance Conversion
Nautical Miles (NM) to feet (ft) = [NM] x 6,076
Feet (ft) to Nautical Miles (NM) = [ft] ÷ 6,076
Nautical Miles (NM) to Kilometers (Km) = [NM] × 1.85
Kilometers (Km) to Nautical Miles (NM) = [Km] ÷ 1.85


Altitude/Elevation Conversion
Feet (ft) to Meters (m) = [ft] ÷ 3.281
Meters (m) to Feet (ft) = [m] × 3.281


Latitude/Longitude Conversion
DDD-MM-SS.SS to DDD-MM.MMM

          SS.SS ÷ 60 =         .MMM
DDD-MM.MMM to DDD-MM-SS.SS

        .MMM      × 60 =       SS.SS
Good hunting!

The Eagle Dynamics SA team

EAGLE DYNAMICS SA © 2020
