How do I install this module?
Upon first starting DCS World after purchasing DCS: Supercarrier, you will first want to install the module. To do
so, select the Module Manager along the top of the Main Menu page:




Once selected, the Module Manager will automatically prompt you to install DCS: Supercarrier.


How do I know the module is installed?
You should now have DCS: Supercarrier installed and have its icon along the bottom of your Main Menu page.
You may need to use the left and right arrows at the ends of the icon bar to find it. From the icon, you can select
it as your Main Menu wallpaper.
How do I select a Supercarrier mission?
All missions on the Supercarrier are found in the aircraft Missions. There is not a Supercarrier Missions list. For
instance: to select F/A-18C Hornet missions that operate from the Supercarrier, select Missions from the Main
Menu page, and then select the F/A-18C.
Included are Hornet Supercarrier missions on both the Black Sea and Persian Gulf maps for:
          •    Cold Start
          •    Launch Start from Catapult
          •    Case I Recovery (daylight landing)
          •    Case II Recovery (reduced visibility)
          •    Case III Recovery (night landing)
To get you started, select the “Mission Qualification – Supercarrier Launch” mission. This will place you hooked
up to catapult 1 and ready to go.
Creating Your Own Mission
Once you have mastered the included familiarization Missions, you may wish to create your own using the
Mission Editor. Let’s go over some of the basics of how to add a Supercarrier.
Select the Mission Editor option from the Main Menu.




Next, select Create New Mission.
The next step is to select the map you wish to use as your canvas and the countries that will take part. In this
example, I have chosen the Persian Gulf map with the default Modern arrangement of countries to the Blue and
Red sides. Once ready, press the green OK button in the bottom right corner.




Welcome to the Mission Editor (ME)! This is a powerful system, but it can also be complex. Let’s go over the
very basics of adding a Supercarrier to a mission. From the Tool Bar along the left side of the ME, select the
ship icon. With that selected, the Naval Group options are displayed along the right side of the ME. To select a
Supercarrier:
     1.   Select Country to USA
     2.   Select Type to CVN-71 Theodore Roosevelt (you can select any of the listed CVNs)

Once set, left mouse-click on any sea area of the ME to create its starting location.
The Supercarrier location appears as a stylized icon with its air defense weapon search (yellow) and
engagement (red) circles around it.
With the ADD button selected, left click again on the map to set the Supercarriers first navigation point.
Subsequent left mouse button clicks add more navigation points to create a route the Supercarrier will follow.
By selecting the EDIT button to the right of the ADD button, you can left mouse button click on a navigation
point to edit it, including holding down the left mouse button over the point and dragging it to a new location.
With the navigation point selected, you can adjust the speed of the supercarrier. With no wind, it is best to have
speed between 20 and 30 knots.




With the Supercarrier placed, you can then add an F/A-18C Hornet to the mission and place its first waypoint
next to the carrier. You can then set its first waypoint from the Type waypoint list to have it start on a catapult
(Takeoff from runway), start ready to go at a parking spot, or start from a cold and dark aircraft in the parking
area.
This was a brief overview to get you started. More detailed information can be found in the DCS: World manual,
with step by step guides to setting up the following:
     •         Set TACAN channel
     •         Set ICLS channel
     •         Set Rules of Engagement
     •         Setting weather conditions that include wind direction and speed
     •         Setting radio frequency




Catapult Start
As mentioned, the Mission Designer can elect to start your aircraft on a catapult or at one of the parking
locations. If you start on a catapult, you simply need to provide the Salute command to the deck crew and away
you go. This can be done either with the key command Left Shift + Left Control + S or pressing \ to bring up the
radio menu dialog:
Select F11. Parent Menu




Select F8. Ground Crew…




Select F6. Salute!
Taxi to Catapult
If you find yourself at one of the parking locations in either a cold and dark aircraft or one ready to go, you will
need to taxi to a takeoff catapult. There are four catapults located on the Supercarrier: two on the bow and two
along the waist.




Behind each catapult is a Jet Blast Deflector (JBD). When you taxi to a catapult, taxi to approach the catapult
from directly behind it and slowly move forward until the taxi director (yellow shirt) on the catapult directs you.




Based on other aircraft being launched, this may not be immediate. Sit tight and the taxi director will bring you
onto the catapult once they are ready.
The catapult hook-up procedure is detailed in the Launch Operations section below.
Returning to the Boat
Recovery (landing) operations are more complicated than launching. These are explained in detail within the
Recovery Operations section below.




Fly Safe and Have Fun
We hope this gets you up and flying with DCS: Supercarrier. Please remember that the following sections are
available to provide detailed instruction on both launches, and more importantly, recovery operations. It also
discusses other elements of the module that include the Landing Signal Officer (LSO) station, the landing
grading scores, and more.
THE NIMITZ CLASS AIRCRAFT CARRIER
Overview
The Nimitz class aircraft carrier (CVN) is a set of ten nuclear powered aircraft carriers currently in service with
the US Navy. The general arrangement of these ships is similar to the previous Kitty Hawk class with a large
4.5-acre flight deck with an island structure on the starboard side reaching nearly 20 stories tall. The angled
deck used for landing is canted approximately 14 degrees to port and is almost 800 feet long. Four high speed
aircraft elevators, each more than 4,000 square feet, bring planes to the flight deck from the hangar below.




     •    Displacement: 72,916 tons light, 96,000 - 102,000 full load.
     •    Length: 1040 feet along the flight deck (317 meters).
     •    Beam: 252 feet (76.8 meters).
     •    Speed: 30+ knots (34.5+ miles per hour).
     •    Power Plant: Two nuclear reactors, four geared steam turbines, four propellers (thirteen to fifteen
          years between refueling or 800,000 to 1,000,000 miles).
     •    Complement: 3,200 regular ship’s compliment + 2,480 Air Wing personnel.
     •    Defense: Four NATO Sea Sparrow, three to four 20mm Vulcan Phalanx CIWS.
     •    Air Wing (including legacy): 70-80 aircraft including F-14s, F/A-18s, EA-6Bs, E-2Cs, S-3A/Bs, C-2s,
          SH-60Fs, HH-60Hs.


The DCS: Supercarrier module represents the Theodore Roosevelt subclass of the Nimitz carrier, often referred
to as the improved Nimitz class. The hulls available here include:
CVN-71 Theodore Roosevelt. (TR, Big Stick) Date commissioned: 25 Oct 1986
CVN-72 Abraham Lincoln. (Abe) Date commissioned: 11 Nov 1989
CVN-73 George Washington. (The Spirit of Freedom, GW, G-Dub) Date commissioned: 04 Jul 1992
Flight Deck Layout and Equipment
The enormous flight deck of a Nimitz class carrier is the core of its offensive capability. During flight operations,
it is regarded as one of the most dangerous places in the world to work.




Catapults
Four catapults are available to ‘slingshot’ aircraft off the deck and into the air. Catapults one and two are located
on the bow while catapult three and four are located on the waist. Together, on average these can launch one
aircraft every 20 seconds. The launch is initiated by personnel situated in the Integrated Catapult Control
Station (ICCS), also called the “bubble”. This is a small dome located between catapult 1 and 2 on the bow and
left of catapult 4 on the waist.
These are steam powered catapults with two cylinders running the length of each track. A piston on each
cylinder connects to a shuttle that extends out of each track. The launching aircraft taxis so the launch bar at its
nose wheel connects to the shuttle. At launch, high pressure steam is ported into the cylinders. This forces the
shuttle down the track at high speed, launching the aircraft. A water brake slows the shuttle at the end of the run
so it can be retracted for the next launch.
Jet Blast Deflectors
These heavy-duty panels are located behind each catapult to deflect high speed exhaust produced by
launching aircraft’s engines. Hydraulic cylinders raise each panel into place upward at a 45 degree angle. A
seawater cooling system is installed in each to prevent damage from hot engine exhaust. These are retracted
when not in use and sit flush with the deck.
Arresting Gear
Four steel arresting cables, also known as cross-deck pendants, span the landing area. The aircraft’s tailhook
connects to one of these cables on touchdown, hauling the aircraft to a stop in about 300 feet.
The cables are made of braided steel strands with a polyester core for flexibility. Each end is connected to an
arresting engine below deck via a purchase cable. The arresting engines are hydro-pneumatic systems that use
a ram and fluid within a cylinder to absorb and disperse the energy of the arrestment.




Cables are numbered one through four from back to front. Although there are four cables, the visual approach
aids are calibrated so the aircraft will catch the three wire on a well-executed approach. Landing short at the
one wire risks a ramp strike at the end of the ship. Landing long at the four wire risks missing the cables
altogether, known as a ‘bolter’.
Hangar Bay
The hangar bay is located two decks below the flight deck and spans approximately two-thirds of the total
length of the carrier. The bay is divided into three areas separated by massive sliding doors that are intended to
limit the damage in the event of a fire or explosion.
The hangar bay is used for aircraft maintenance, as well as spare parts and equipment storage.




Elevators
Four large elevators provide for movement of aircraft to and from the hangar bay and flight deck. Each can hold
two aircraft or about 150,000 lbs of equipment.
In addition to the four main elevators, there are several small weapons elevators located around the flight deck.
Flight Deck Personnel
The DCS: Supercarrier module includes deck crew who will direct you into position on the catapults and perform
steps necessary to launch your aircraft. Additional crew members may also be placed on deck by mission
designers.
All personnel on the flight deck wear colored jerseys that indicate their role.



                            Yellow Shirts
                            These include the Plane Directors who will guide you around the deck and into
                            position for launch. All taxi guidance comes from these personnel.
                            Other yellow shirts include Flight Deck Officers, Arresting Gear Officers, Catapult
                            Officers (Shooters), Catapult Spotters and Aircraft Handling Officers.




                            Green Shirts
                            You will encounter these personnel during launch as Catapult and Arresting Gear
                            crews position the holdback bar and ensure proper attachment to the catapult
                            shuttle. Maintenance personnel of various specialties may also be on hand to
                            troubleshoot last minute problems with the aircraft.
                            Other green shirts include Helicopter Landing Signal Enlisted (LSE), Cargo-handling
                            personnel, Ground support equipment troubleshooters, Hook runners and
                            Photographers mates



                            Brown Shirts
                            These include Plane Captains and Line Petty Officers. Aircraft general maintenance
                            and servicing is performed by these personnel. They are responsible for the safe
                            operation of the aircraft in flight and are often referred to as ‘owning’ the aircraft.




                            Blue Shirts
                            These personnel position aircraft on the deck when they are not being taxied by the
                            pilot. They include Aircraft handlers (pushers, chockers, chainers, etc.), Tractor
                            Drivers, Messengers and Phone Talkers and Elevator Operators.
Purple Shirts
These are the Fueling personnel who are responsible for safely refueling aircraft and
equipment on deck. This is an important job due to the extreme risk fire poses to a
crowded flight deck.




Red Shirts
These are the Aviation Ordnancemen who build, test, transport, and load weapons
on the aircraft. They also test and maintain the aircraft gun systems, as well as
avionics and release equipment used to employ weapons in the air.
Crash and salvage crews and Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) personnel are
also red shirts.




White Shirts
You will encounter these personnel during launch as Final Checkers give your
aircraft a last-minute look for problems.
The Landing Signal Officers (LSO) are also white shirts. For more on this, see the
section on the LSO Station below.
Other white shirts include Safety personnel, Medical personnel, Quality Assurance
personnel and Air Transfer Officers (ATO).
Instrument Approach Equipment
The aircraft carrier is a floating airport, complete with all the equipment necessary to conduct instrument
approaches. See the section on mission editor features for information on how to set these up in a mission.



Tactical Air Navigation System (TACAN)
The TACAN system provides relative bearing and/or slant range distance to a selected TACAN station (land,
ship or aircraft). TACAN range depends on aircraft altitude Line Of Sight (LOS) to the station, but can have a
maximum range of 200 miles for an airborne station and 390 miles for a surface station. Each TACAN station
has a three-letter identifier which is used to identify the beacon.
The ship’s TACAN is used primarily for determining its position while on approach or establishing a holding
pattern. The TACAN is referred to as “father” while the carrier is referred to as “mother”.



Instrument Carrier Landing System (ICLS)
US Navy and Marine Corps carrier-based aircraft are equipped with the AN/SPN-41A Instrument Carrier
Landing System (ICLS). This operates much like a traditional ILS system, but it is only operational for US
aircraft carriers.
Using the ICLS is a matter of setting up the correct aircraft carrier ICLS channel and following the localizer and
glideslope beams to within visual distance of the IFLOLS visual reference at the ship.
The azimuth transmitter is installed at the stern of the ship, slightly below the centerline of the landing area. The
elevation transmitter is located above the flight deck, aft of the island.
The ICLS is referred to as “bullseye” to differentiate it from the ACLS.



Automated Carrier Landing System (ACLS)
The AN/SPN-46 ACLS is similar to the ICLS in that it displays "needles" that provide approach guidance
information to the aircrew. But unlike the ICLS, the system is gyro-stabilized to provide accurate glideslope and
azimuth data regardless of deck movement in heavy seas. Up to two aircraft may be controlled by the system
simultaneously.
The ACLS has three modes for approach:
Mode I. This mode provides for an automatic, hands off approach. Command and error signals are transmitted
to the aircraft from the ACLS. The aircraft then translates them into the appropriate control actions to stay on
the proper approach path all the way to landing. (Mode 1a is a submode where the pilot takes over the
approach after visual acquisition of the IFLOLS.)
Mode II. This mode is similar to a conventional ILS approach. Glideslope and azimuth errors are transmitted to
the aircraft and shown on a display. The pilot manually ‘flies the needles’ to stay on the proper approach path.
Mode III. This is known as a Carrier Controlled Approach (CCA). No data is transmitted directly to the aircraft.
The approach controller provides verbal azimuth and glideslope information to the pilot, who flies the approach
manually based on this guidance.
See the applicable aircraft manual for information on system operation and available modes.
Improved Fresnel Lens Optical Landing System (IFLOLS)
This device is mounted on the left side of the carrier to provide the pilot with visual glidepath information during
the final phase of the approach. The system displays a bright orange ‘ball’ that is dynamically stabilized to
compensate for ship’s pitch, roll and heave motion. The system is normally set for a 3.5° glideslope targeting
the 3-wire.




The ball appears aligned between two horizontal datum lights when the pilot is approaching on the optimum
glide path. If the ball is above the datum lights the aircraft is above the glidepath. If the ball is below the datum
lights, the aircraft is below glidepath.




Lens Assembly. The lens assembly is a vertical box that contains 12 fiber optic light cells. The aircraft’s
position on the glidepath determines which cell is visible to the pilot. The upper cells are amber in color while
the bottom two are red. If a red lens is visible, the aircraft is dangerously low.
Datum Lights. Green datum lights are mounted horizontally to the lens assembly with ten lights on each side.
The position of the ball in reference to the datum lights provides the pilot with glideslope information. If the ball
is illuminated above or below the datums, the aircraft is high or low respectively.
Cut Lights. Mounted horizontally and centered above the lens box are four green cut lights. The cut lights are
used by the LSO to communicate with the aircraft during Zip Lip (no radio) operations. As the aircraft
approaches the groove, the LSO will momentarily illuminate the cut lights to indicate a “Roger ball” call.
Subsequent illumination of the cut lights indicates a call to add power.
Waveoff Lights. Waveoff lights are mounted vertically on each side of the lens box. These red lights are
controlled by the LSO. When they are illuminated, the aircraft must immediately execute a waveoff. The LSO
will initiate a waveoff any time the deck is foul (people or equipment in the landing area) or an aircraft is not
within safe approach parameters.



FLOLS Overlay
An additional overlay with all the elements listed above is available to assist pilots flying in VR or with lower
screen resolutions, who may not be able to see the IFLOLS on the carrier clearly. It is activated when your
aircraft is on final approach and configured for landing.
The overlay may be repositioned by clicking and dragging the ‘FLOLS’ text at the top.




  Click to Drag




      FLOLS
      Overlay




See the LSO Station section for additional information on related displays and controls.
Long Range Laser Lineup System
The Long Range Laser Lineup System uses eye-safe, color-coded lasers to provide visual lineup information to
approaching aircraft. These low intensity lasers are projected aft of the ship and are visible out to 10 miles at
night.
The color of the laser light and rate at which they flash indicate the pilot’s position in relation to the angled
deck’s centerline.
     •    Steady Amber – within 0.5 degree of centerline
     •    Steady Green – 0.5 – 0.7 right of centerline
     •    Slow Flashing Green – 0.75 – 4.0 degrees right of centerline
     •    Fast Flashing Green - 4.0 – 6.0 degrees right of centerline
     •    Steady Red – 0.5 – 0.7 left of centerline
     •    Slow Flashing Red – 0.75 – 4.0 degrees left of centerline
     •    Fast Flashing Red - 4.0 – 6.0 degrees left of centerline
Defensive Systems
The Nimitz Class carriers rely on their own aircraft or other assets in the Carrier Battle Group for defense
against air or missile attack but still have their own defensive systems in case threats happen to break through.
These systems operate automatically unless defensive actions are intentionally disabled using the mission
editor.


Mk 15 Phalanx   RIM-7 Sea Sparrow
                                                                                                   RIM-116 RAM




                                                                                   Mk 15 Phalanx    RIM-7 Sea Sparrow
RIM-116 RAM




RIM-7 Sea Sparrow Missiles. These are short to medium range semi-active radar
guided missiles housed in an 8-cell MK 29 box launcher. Their primary targets are
aircraft or anti-ship cruise missiles.




RIM-116 Rolling Airframe Missiles (RAM). These are small heat-seeking missiles
used for point defense against anti-ship missiles. They are launched from MK 49 box
launchers, each holding 21 missiles.




Mk 15 Phalanx Close-In Weapon System (CIWS). This system consists of radar-
guided 20 mm Vulcan cannon mounted on a swiveling base. It serves as a last line of
defense against anti-ship missiles.
Viewing the Carrier
The standard ‘Ship View’ is available using the [F9] key. Use your mouse to move the view around and zoom in
and out.




Select [LALT+F9] for a view from the LSO Station. This station has additional functionality, and is covered in
detail in the LSO Station section.
Select [RCTRL+F9] for a view from each catapult. Each subsequent press of the keyboard command takes you
to the next catapult in sequence.




Select [RSHIFT+F9] for a view of the Hangar Bay. Use the mouse to look around and the mouse wheel to move
fore and aft.
Additional Supercarrier Module Assets
The new and upgraded features in the DCS: Supercarrier module focus on the Nimitz Class carriers but other
naval assets have received upgrades or additions with this module. These include the all new Arleigh Burke
Class guided missile destroyer (right) and a new model for the Admiral Kuznetsov aircraft carrier (left) that was
already included with DCS: World.




          Left to right: Admiral Kuznetsov CV, Nimitz Class CVN, Arleigh Burke Class DDG
Admiral Kuznetsov Aircraft Carrier
The Admiral Kuznetsov is the Russian Navy’s largest warship and its sole aircraft carrier capable of carrying
horizontal take-off and landing aircraft. Although an aircraft carrier at first glance, it is technically designated an
‘aircraft-carrying cruiser’, due to its formidable long-range anti-ship cruise missile capability. This designation
allows it to pass in and out of the Black Sea while conforming to the 1936 Montreux Convention, an
international agreement that does not allow aircraft carriers heavier than 15,000 tons to pass through the
Turkish Straits.




The Admiral Kuznetsov differs greatly from US aircraft carrier designs in that it does not feature catapults for
launching aircraft. Instead, it features a ‘ski-jump’, or upward curved ramp, that converts some of the aircraft’s
forward momentum into a positive rate of climb. This, along with wind over the deck from the carrier’s speed,
greatly reduces the required takeoff roll for aircraft.
Three starting positions are available for fighter aircraft. Positions 1 and 2 are located near the bow of the ship
and provide a 90-meter takeoff run. Position 3 is located farther aft and provides a takeoff run of 180 meters,
twice that of the other two. This third location should be selected for aircraft with heavier fuel or weapons
loadouts that require a longer takeoff run.




                                                   Parking
                                                    (typical)

                         Elevator                               Elevator
Each starting position features a jet blast deflector that serves the same function as on the Nimitz class carrier.
There are also two holdback devices, or ‘stoppers’, that extend upwards, forward of the main wheels. These
hold the aircraft in place until after the aircraft’s engines are run up before launch.




   Jet Blast
   Deflector




   Stoppers




The Luna-3 Optical Landing System works in a manner similar to the Nimitz class’s IFLOLS system. A green
light indicator will be visible when on glideslope for landing. A yellow light will be visible when above glideslope
and red light will be visible when below glideslope.
Aircraft also land on an angled deck in a comparable way to those on the Nimitz class carrier. Four arresting
wires of the Svetlana-2 system are strung across the deck at a spacing of 12 meters. The aircraft’s tailhook
catches a wire and brings it to a stop.




 Luna-3 OLS



                                                                                                        Arresting Wires
Offensive Weapons
The Admiral Kuznetsov is equipped with SS-N-19 'Shipwreck' (P-700 Granit) anti-ship missiles, fired from 12
vertical launch tubes on the forward flight deck. A small solid rocket fires them clear of the launcher. Flight is
sustained by a turbojet propulsion system, accelerating the missile to a top speed of mach 2.5 at high altitude or
mach 1.2 at its normal low altitude. The maximum range is approximately 300 nm (550 km).
The missiles rely on their own inertial navigation system to approach the target then switch to active radar
homing for the terminal guidance phase. A 1,650 lb (750 kg) conventional warhead is fitted for use against
ships.




Engagements with these missiles are limited to a 90-degree arc in front of the firing vessel. The carrier must be
maneuvered into the proper position before firing.




                        Admiral Kuznetsov


                                                    90º

                                  Firing Arc

                                                                             Target




The ‘Attack Group’ task is recommended to allow realistic target sorting for waves of multiple missiles. See the
DCS: World manual for details on setting this up.
Defensive Weapons
The Admiral Kuznetsov is equipped with multiple defensive weapon systems for defense against aircraft,
missile or submarine threats. Operation of these systems is automatic unless defensive actions are intentionally
disabled using the mission editor.

AK-630    UDAV-1   Kortik   SA-N-9          AK-630
                                                                              SA-N-9    Kortik




                                                                          SA-N-9        Kortik
 AK-630   UDAV-1   Kortik   SA-N-9            AK-630



SA-N-9 Gauntlet (3K95 Kinzhal). This is a navalized variant of the SA-15 Gauntlet air defense system.
Missiles are launched from vertical launch tubes with the exit ports flush-mounted with the ship’s structure. It is
capable of engaging threats out to a range of 6.5 nm (12 km).
Kortik Air Defense System. This is a combined gun and missile system, similar to the land-based SA-19
Grison (Tunguska). It provides close-in engagement of aircraft and missile threats out to a range of 2.2 nm (4
km). The 30mm gun system is also capable of engaging ship or shore targets.
AK-630 CIWS. This fully automatic Close In Weapon System (CIWS) consists of turret mounted 30mm guns
directed by a radar. It is primarily used to defend against small, high-speed missile threats.
UDAV-1. This system operates in conjunction with the ship’s sonar to engage submarine or torpedo threats.
Different rocket types can be fired from turrets mounted on the stern of the ship.
LAUNCH OPERATIONS
Flight Deck Procedures
After startup, you will need to taxi to a catapult for launch. Catapults 1 and 2 are on the bow and catapults 3 and
4 are on the waist. Unless you are directed to a specific catapult during the briefing, you may choose any of the
four.
Taxi to the desired catapult using small power inputs while using nosewheel steering in high gain.




Once behind the Jet Blast Defector (JBD) of the catapult you will launch from, follow the signals given by the
Taxi Director.
Catapult Procedures
To ensure proper spotting on the catapult, you must follow the signals from the Taxi Director precisely. The
normal sequence for catapult operations is as follows:
1. Unfold wings. When directed, spread the wings using the applicable aircraft controls.




                                                Unfold Wings


2. Align with catapult track. When directed, slowly move forward of the JBD. The Taxi Director will provide
signals for left or right turns to align your nosewheel along the catapult track.




                Turn Left                       Taxi Forward                        Turn Right
3. Stop and extend launch bar. When directed, stop and hold the brakes. Extend the launch bar using
applicable aircraft controls.




                            Stop                                Extend Launch Bar
4. Connect to catapult shuttle. Following the Director’s signals, taxi forward slowly to position the launch bar
over the shuttle. Significant power, as much as 80-85% RPM, may be required. When the launch bar drops over
the shuttle, the aircraft will be stopped as the holdback engages the catapult buffer. Reduce power to idle.




                        Taxi Forward                                      Stop
5. Seat launch bar in shuttle. When directed, raise the launch bar to seat it in the catapult shuttle. Note that
the bar will not fully retract until it is clear of the shuttle after launch.




                                               Raise Launch Bar


6. Run up engines and perform final checks. The Director will pass control to the Catapult Officer, who will
signal for engine run-up. Check the engine instruments and monitor the caution and warning lights. Wipeout the
controls and verify the full throw of the stick and rudder in all directions.




                                                Run Up Engines
7. Select ‘SALUTE’ from radio menu. When ready for launch, give the ‘SALUTE’ command from the radio
menu or keyboard command [LCtrl+LShift+S]. The Catapult Officer will make final checks, looking fore and aft,
and then touch the deck.




                                                     Launch


8. Launch. The catapult will fire, and the aircraft will accelerate, reaching end speed in about two seconds. As
the aircraft clears the end of the deck, rotate to a nose up attitude and establish a positive rate of climb. Gear
and flaps will be raised in accordance with the specific aircraft’s procedures.
Case I Departure
Case I departures are flown during the day when weather conditions allow departure under visual flight rules
(VFR). The weather minimums are a cloud deck above 3,000 feet and visibility greater than 5 miles.
Once the aircraft clears the catapult and a positive rate of climb is established, execute a clearing turn to stay
clear of the ship’s path. Climb to 500 feet and fly parallel to the ship’s heading, or base recovery course (BRC).
Continue straight ahead at 500 feet and 300 KIAS paralleling BRC until 7 miles from the carrier. At that point,
climb along the planned route.
Case II Departure
Case II departures are flown during the day when visual conditions are present at the carrier, but a controlled
climb through the clouds is required. The weather minimums are a cloud deck above 1,000 feet and visibility
greater than 5 miles.
After the clearing turn, proceed straight ahead at 500 feet and 300 KIAS paralleling the BRC as on Case I. At 7
miles from the carrier, turn to intercept the arc running 10 miles from the carrier, staying below the cloud deck.
Stay on this 10-mile arc until you reach the briefed departure radial. Climb on that course maintaining 300 KIAS
until clear of the clouds.
Case III Departure
Case III departures are flown at night and when weather conditions are below the minimums of 1,000 feet cloud
deck and 5 miles visibility. A controlled climb is maintained throughout the departure.
The aircraft will launch with a minimum launch interval of 30 seconds between aircraft. Following the launch,
climb straight ahead at 300 KIAS, crossing 5 nautical miles from the carrier at 1500 feet AGL or above.
At 7 nm from the carrier, turn to intercept the 10 nm arc. Continue climbing along the arc until you reached the
briefed departure radial. Continue to climb on that course until clear of the weather.
RECOVERY OPERATIONS
Overview
The recovery process starts on entry to the Carrier Control Area, or CCA. This is a fifty-mile radius circle around
the carrier where standardized procedures are followed to quickly recover large numbers of aircraft with as little
communication as possible.
Once inside the CCA, check in on Marshal frequency with call sign, position, altitude and fuel state. Marshal will
provide recovery holding instructions and pass the ship’s weather, altimeter setting and ship’s heading (BRC).
Three different types of recovery can be expected depending on the current weather conditions:
Case I: This is a daytime visual recovery flown in when the cloud deck is higher than 3,000 feet and visibility is
greater than 5 miles. Aircraft proceed to a holding stack over the carrier. Case I recoveries are used to the
maximum extent possible.
Case II: Case II recoveries are flown when weather conditions require instrument flight during the descent but
allow visual flight near the carrier. Case III procedures are used until the ship is in sight, at which point, Case I
procedures will be used. The minimum weather requirements are a 1,000-foot ceiling and 5-mile visibility.
Case III: This instrument recovery is used at night or when the weather is below Case II minimums. Case II and
III recoveries are flown from a marshal stack behind the carrier.
Case I Recovery
Case I recovery begins when you contact the carrier Marshal with an ‘INBOUND’ radio command. After
receiving direction from Marshal, you will set up to enter the holding pattern over the carrier. At 10 miles, you
should have the carrier in sight and report ’SEE YOU AT 10’ over the radio. The Marshal controller will hand
you off to the tower and you will enter the holding stack.
The tower will clear you to leave the holding pattern and commence your landing approach. You will descend
from holding and fly by the carrier just outboard on the starboard side at 800 feet. You will give a ‘KISS OFF’
command to your flight and execute an overhead ‘break’ to the left and enter the landing pattern.
At ¾ nm behind the ship, you will enter ‘the groove’ and report in with the Landing Signal Officer (LSO) with a
‘BALL’ radio call. You will fly the rest of the approach and landing based on visual indications on the IFLOLS
ball and verbal instructions given by the LSO.




If all goes well, you will catch one of the arresting wires with your tailhook and taxi to parking. If not, you will
either ‘waveoff’, abort the approach and reenter the landing pattern, or ‘bolter’, touch down on the deck and
reenter the landing pattern.
Let us have a closer look at each phase in sequence.
Marshal
At 50 miles or closer, you should select ‘INBOUND’ from the ATC carrier radio menu. Upon doing so, the
following message is sent from you to the marshal controller:


“Marshal, [SIDE NUMBER] holding hands with [SIDE NUMBER], marking mom’s [BEARING FROM SHIP
TO PLAYER] for [RANGE], angels [ALTITUDE], [NUMBER IN FLIGHT], low state [REMAINING FUEL].”


The carrier MARSHAL will respond with:
“[SIDE NUMBER], mother’s weather is [VISIBILITY], [CLOUDS], altimeter [PRESSURE]. CASE I recovery
expected BRC is [HEADING OF CARRIER]. Report a see me at 10.”


You will automatically acknowledge with:
“[SIDE NUMBER].”



See You at 10
After the initial check in with Marshal, proceed directly to the carrier and enter overhead holding at your
squadron’s holding altitude. Altitudes are assigned in 1,000-foot increments starting at 2,000 feet above the
carrier, so your holding altitude could be 2,000 feet, 3,000 feet, 4,000 feet, and so on. Aircraft returning for Case
I recoveries must be established at their holding altitudes no later than 10 nautical miles from the carrier.
Once you are within 10 miles and visual contact is established, you should select ‘SEE YOU AT 10’ from the
ATC carrier radio menu item.


You will send:
“[SIDE NUMBER] see you at 10.”


Marshal will respond with:
“[SIDE NUMBER], update state, go tower.”


You automatically respond with:
“[SIDE NUMBER], [FUEL REMANING]”


You will then proceed to holding and enter the pattern at the outside of the turn. (See the visual aid below.) The
next radio call will happen automatically when you enter the holding pattern and are within 3 miles of the carrier.
Holding Pattern
The overhead holding pattern is a left-hand pattern, with Point 1 located directly overhead the carrier and Points
2, 3 and 4 following in 90-degree increments. This holding pattern is often referred to as the “stack”. All aircraft
must remain within 5 nm of the carrier and no lower than 2,000 feet AGL.
Any climbs must be accomplished between points 1 and 3 while any descents must be accomplished between
points 3 and 1.




While holding, the flight will remain at max conserve fuel flow unless briefed otherwise.
Aircraft in overhead holding will stagger their intervals to ensure equal spacing from all flights at the same
altitude. If there are two total flights, then they should be 180-degrees apart. Three flights should be 120-
degrees apart. Four flights will be 90-degrees apart.
You will leave the holding pattern on the ‘charlie’ signal from the tower.
Commencing the Approach
Once you are within 3 nm of carrier and enough interval exists between you and other landing aircraft, you will
automatically send:


“[TOWER], [SIDE NUMBER], overhead, angels [ALTITUDE], [NUMBER IN FLGHT], low state [REMAINING
FUEL].”


The tower responds with:
“[SIDE NUMBER], Tower, Roger. BRC is [CARRIER HEADING], your signal is Charlie.”


You will auto-respond with:
“[SIDE NUMBER].”


At this point, the next communication will be with the LSO at ¾ mile behind the carrier.
The flight will depart holding from outside point 3 and descend to 800 feet. An arcing turn will be flown to the
initial point 3nm astern of the ship. The flight will continue inbound and fly just outboard the starboard side of the
ship at 800 feet, paralleling BRC. The radio command ‘KISS OFF’ should be given to your flight and the landing
pattern should be entered.
Overhead Break
The landing pattern is entered with the radio command ‘KISS OFF’ to your flight followed by a sharp break turn
to the left. The members of your flight will continue ahead and execute their own break to enter the pattern
behind you. A 15-20 second break interval will correspond to a proper 40-60 second landing interval.
If you are unable to break before 4 nm, you will have to depart and reenter the pattern. To accomplish this,
maintain 800 feet until 5 nm from the carrier, then climb to 1,200 feet and execute a left-hand descending arc
back to the initial.
Break altitude is 800 feet, and all breaks will be level. When established on downwind, you will descend to
pattern altitude of 600 feet, configure for landing and closely monitor the abeam distance. The optimal distance
varies from aircraft to aircraft but 1 ¼ to 1 ½ miles generally allows a smooth entry into the next phase called
‘the groove’.
In the Groove
You will continue to descend in a left-hand turn, rolling out wings level ¾ nm astern of the ship in line with the
angled deck. This phase will be flown based on the state of the IFLOLS ball and verbal directions from the LSO.




Call the Ball
When your aircraft is in the groove (wings level) and you have the ball in sight, you should select ‘BALL’ from
the ATC carrier radio menu.
You will transmit: “[SIDE NUMBER] [Ball] [FUEL STATE]”
The LSO responds with: “Roger ball”


The LSO may also make these calls if your aircraft is not configured for landing:
“Wave off, gear” – Your landing gear is not extended.
“Wave off, flaps” – Your flaps are not configured for landing.


Clara
If you do not have the ball in sight, select ‘CLARA’ from the ATC menu. The LSO will provide the following calls
to get you on glidepath if necessary:
“You’re high” – You are far above the glidepath.
“You’re low, POWER” – You are far below the glidepath.
If you are still not within glidepath limits at ½ mile astern of the carrier the LSO will transmit “Wave off, wave
off, wave off”. The IFLOLS waveoff lights will also flash red.
‘Clara’ may be transmitted automatically in some cases when you greatly exceed glidepath limits. “Ball” will be
automatically transmitted once you are back within glidepath limits. The LSO will respond with “Roger ball”.
Inside ¾ Mile
When inside ¾ mile and the ball call has been made, direction from the LSO is based on your deviation from
localizer centerline and 3.6-degree glidepath.




     •     No direction = under 1.7 degrees left or right of localizer and less than 1.5 degrees below and less
           than 2.5 degrees above optimal glidepath
     •     Off centerline = greater than 1.7 degrees left or right of optimal localizer centerline
     •     Off glidepath = greater than 1.5 degrees below and greater than 2.5 degrees above optimal glidepath
     •     Far off centerline = greater than 2.9 degrees left or right of optimal localizer centerline
     •     Far off glidepath = 2.7 degrees or greater below or 4.9 degrees or greater above optimal glidepath


“You’re high” – Aircraft is far above the glidepath.
“You’re low, POWER” – Aircraft is far below the glidepath.
“You’re lined up left” – Aircraft is far left of centerline.
“You’re lined up right” – Aircraft is far right of centerline.
“You’re fast” – Angle of attack is too low.
“You’re slow” – Angle of attack is too high.
“Easy with the nose” – Aircraft has excessive pitch rate. (>5 degrees per second)
“Easy with your wings” – Aircraft has excessive roll angle. (>20 degrees)
“Easy with it” – Aircraft thrust changes are excessive. (>30% per second)
Inside ½ Mile
As you approach the carrier’s stern, direction from the LSO becomes more precise.


“You’re high” or “You’re high, bring it down” or “You’re high, work it down.” – Aircraft is above glideslope
more than 3 seconds.
“Power” (normal inflection) – Aircraft is below glideslope more than two seconds or aircraft on glideslope but is
descending more than 1 degree per second for 2 seconds. If same call is made 2 seconds later: “Power” with
more urgent inflection.
“power, Power, POWER” – Aircraft is far below glidepath and sinking rapidly.
“Easy with it” – Greater than 1 degree per second change in glidepath following a “power” call.
“Right for lineup” – Aircraft is left of centerline.
“Come left” – Aircraft is right of centerline.
“Wave off, wave off, wave off” – Two or more of the above conditions are true at the same time for a 2
second or more duration or excessive glidepath and localizer deviation for more than 4 seconds.
“Wave off, wave off, wave off, foul deck” – Another aircraft is in the landing area
“Bolter, bolter, bolter” – Aircraft wheels touch and tailhook misses arresting cables.
Landing
Do not anticipate an arrested landing. When the aircraft touches down, advance the power to max and retract
the speed brakes in anticipation of a bolter. Maintain max power until the aircraft comes to a complete stop.
Then, release the brakes and allow the aircraft to be pulled back. The arresting wire will release from the hook
and you will be free to taxi to a parking location.




The LSO will grade each landing and display the results at the top right of your screen. The format is [GRADE]:
[MAIN ERRORS], [ERROR LOCATION], [WIRE CAUGHT].
A typical landing grade may look like this:



Transcription: “No grade. Drifted way right in close. Landed a little left in the wires. Caught number 4 wire.”


Grades:
     •    WO - Waveoff
     •    OWO - Own Waveoff
     •    _OK_ - Perfect pass
     •    OK - Reasonable deviations with good corrections
     •    (OK) - Fair. Reasonable deviations
     •    --- - No-grade. Below average but safe pass
     •    C - Cut. Unsafe, gross deviations inside waveoff window
     •    B - Bolter


Main errors:
     •    AFU - All “fouled” up
     •    DL - Drifted left
     •    DR - Drifted right
     •    EG - Eased gun (pulled throttles back to help set the hook for arrestment)
     •    F - Fast
     •    FD - Fouled deck
     •    H - High
     •    LL - Landed left
     •    LO - Low
     •    LR - Landed right
     •    LUL - Lined up left
     •    LUR - Lined up right
     •    N - Nose
     •    NERD - Not enough rate of descent
     •    NSU - Not set up
     •    P - Power
     •    SLO – Slow
     •    TMRD – Too much rate of descent
     •    W - Wings
     •    LLWD - Landed left wing down
     •    LRWD - Landed right wing down
     •    LNF - Landed nose
     •    3PTS - Landed 3 points


Distance marks placed after error:
     •    BC - Ball call (before first 1/3 of glideslope)
     •    X - At the start (first 1/3 of glideslope)
     •    IM - In the middle (middle 1/3 of the glideslope)
     •    IC - In close (last 1/3 of glideslope)
     •    AR - At the ramp
     •    TL - To land (between AR and first wire)
     •    IW - In the wires
     •    AW – After wires


Note 1: Parentheses ( ) around any symbol signifies “a little” (e.g., "(F)" means “a little fast”)
Note 2: Underline. For emphasis (e.g."_H_" means “very high”)
Note 3: A square [ ] around any symbol indicates that a signal was not answered (e.g. “[BC]” means no ball call
has been made)


After landing, you have the option to taxi to a catapult and take off again immediately. To do so, alert the ground
crew by selecting ‘Request Launch’ from the ground crew communications menu. The catapult crew will be
ready to hook you up at whatever catapult you taxi to.
Touch and Go & Bolters
The procedures for touch and go landings and bolters are identical. Continue to fly the ball all the way to
touchdown. Upon touchdown, simultaneously advance power to max, retract speed brakes, and rotate to
optimum AOA for takeoff. Maintain wings level and verify a positive rate of climb.
Once a positive rate of climb is established and your aircraft is forward of the bow, use a shallow right turn to
parallel the BRC. Climb to pattern altitude (600 feet) and turn downwind with proper interval with other landing
aircraft.



Waveoff
Procedures for a waveoff are the same as touch and go or bolter, except you will depart straight down the
angled deck.
Case II Recovery
Case II recovery occurs during daylight hours when conditions may be poor on the approach but adequate for
landing under visual flight rules. The cloud ceiling must be above 1,000 feet and visibility more than 5 nm.
This can be thought of as a combination of Case I and Case III. The Case III procedures are used outside 10
nm and Case I procedures are used inside 10 nm.
For a CASE II recovery, you will radio “see you at 10” when the aircraft is 10 nm from the carrier just as on a
Case I recovery. Radio control is transferred from the approach controller to the tower controller. At this point,
the pilot performs an overhead break and landing. No Case I holding stack is required.
Case III Recovery
Case III recovery occurs when any cloud celling is below 1,000 feet or when visibility is less than 5 nm
regardless of cloud ceiling. All night operations are conducted in Case III.




This approach starts with an ‘INBOUND’ call to the Marshal who will assign a holding location, holding altitude
and an approach time. You will depart the holding stack at that approach time and radio ‘COMMENCING’ to the
Marshal controller.
You will descend and check in with the Approach Controller. Reduce descent rate when passing 5,000 feet and
report ‘PLATFORM’. Level off at 1,200 feet.
At 10 nm from the carrier, configure for landing. You will reduce speed to pass 6 miles from the carrier at 150
KIAS. You will achieve an ACLS lock if applicable and fly the needles on approach. Expect to reach 600 feet at
3 miles from the carrier, on speed for landing.
At ¾ nm behind the ship, you report in with the Landing Signal Officer (LSO) with a ‘BALL’ radio call. You will fly
the rest of the approach and landing based on visual indications on the IFLOLS ball and verbal instructions
given by the LSO.
If all goes well, you will catch one of the arresting wires with your tailhook and taxi to parking. If not, you will
either ‘waveoff’, abort the approach and reenter the landing pattern, or ‘bolter’, touch down on the deck and
reenter the landing pattern.
Let us look more closely at each step.
Marshal
The first step for a Case II or III recovery is having your flight enter a marshal holding stack behind the carrier.
At 50 miles or closer, you will select ‘INBOUND’ from the ATC carrier radio menu. Upon doing so, the following
message will be sent from you:


“Marshal, [SIDE NUMBER] holding hands with [FLIGHT MEMBERS], marking mom’s [BEARING FROM
SHIP TO PLAYER] for [RANGE], angels [ALTITUDE], low state [REMAINING FUEL].”


Marshal responds with:
 “[SIDE NUMBER], [SHIP CALLSIGN] marshal, CASE II/III recovery, CV-1 approach, expected BRC
[CARRIER HEADING], altimeter [PRESSURE]. [SIDE NUMBER], marshal mother’s [MARSHAL RADIAL
BEARING] radial, [DISTANCE] DME, angels [ALTITUDE]. Expected approach time is [TIME]”


If a two-ship checks in during CASE III, the aircraft that intends to land first (and get the lower marshal altitude)
should have their side number read first. Marshall will issue instructions to the first side number and after
“readback correct” give marshal instructions to the second one.


You will automatically respond with:
“[SIDE NUMBER], marshal on the [RADIAL BEARING], for [RANGE] DME, angels [ALTITUDE]. Expected
approach time [TIME]. Approach button is [CHANNEL].”


Marshal will reply:
“[SIDE NUMBER], readback correct.”


The distance of the holding stack is calculated as one nautical mile for every 1,000 feet of altitude, plus 15. So,
for example, if the aircraft is assigned a marshal stack altitude of 8,000 feet, the distance to the carrier is 23
nautical miles.


   Altitude (ft)      6,000   7,000    8,000    9,000   10,000   11,000   12,000   13,000   14,000    15,000   16,000

  Distance (nm)        21      22       23       24       25       26       27       28       29       30       31




Once you are at the directed altitude and within 20 miles of the marshal stack, you will select ‘ESTABLISHED’
from the ATC carrier menu.


Upon doing so, the following message will be sent:
“[SIDE NUMBER], established angels [ALTITUDE]. State [FUEL LEVEL].”
Marshal will reply:
“[SIDE NUMBER], roger, state [FUEL LEVEL].”


Aircraft will fly the marshal holding pattern with 6-minute left-hand turns: two minutes turns and one-minute legs.
Each flight (maximum of 2 aircraft per flight for Case II and one aircraft for Case III) will hold at offset patterns
with 1,000 feet of separation. The lowest flight in the stack will land next.
Each aircraft will generally push to the carrier from the marshal stack at minimum intervals of 60 seconds. This
provides at least 1-minute between each landing.
When you reach the assigned push time, you will select ‘COMMENCING’ from the ATC carrier menu. The
following message will be sent:


“[SIDE NUMBER] commencing, [ALTIMETER], state [FUEL LEVEL].”


Marshal will reply:
“[SIDE NUMBER], radar contact [DME] miles, expected final bearing [DEGREES].”


You will acknowledge with:
“[SIDE NUMBER].”


Once the aircraft leaves the marshal stack, it will descend at 4,000 feet per minute (fpm) at 250 knots until
5,000 feet altitude, at which point the descent rate is reduced to 2,000 fpm. This is maintained until 1,200 feet
for CASE II.
For a CASE II recovery, you will auto-radio “see you at 10” when the aircraft is 10 nm from the carrier just as
on a Case I recovery. Radio control is transferred from the marshal controller to the tower controller. At this
point, the pilot performs an overhead break and landing. No holding pattern is required.
Approach
Shortly after leaving the marshal stack, you will be handed off to the Approach controller. Marshal will transmit:
[SIDE NUMBER], switch approach.


You will acknowledge with
[SIDE NUMBER].


At this point, control will be transferred from marshal to approach, and you must check in with the new
controller. From the ATC carrier menu, you will select ‘CHECK IN’. Upon doing so, the following message will
be sent:
“[SIDE NUMBER], checking in, [DISTANCE TO CARRIER] miles, [FUEL LEVEL].”


Approach replies with:
“[SIDE NUMBER], final bearing [BEARING].”


You acknowledge with:
“[SIDE NUMBER].”


At 5,000 feet AGL you will select ‘PLATFORM’ from the ATC carrier menu. You will transmit:
“[SIDE NUMBER], platform.”


Approach will acknowledge with:
“[SIDE NUMBER], roger.”


When your aircraft intercepts final landing bearing, approach will transmit:
“[SIDE NUMBER] fly bullseye.”


You will acknowledge with:
“[SIDE NUMBER].”


‘Bullseye’ refers to the Instrument Carrier Landing System (ICLS) carrier-based aircraft are equipped with. It
functions identically to a land-based ILS system, where you will ‘fly the needles’, following the azimuth and
glidepath guidance provided on the HUD or instruments. See the aircraft manual for the aircraft you are flying
for a complete description of system operation.
At 10 nm, you should begin to reduce your speed and at 8 nm, you should configure for landing. At 6 nm, the
aircraft should be on-speed.
The Long Range Laser Lineup System (LRLLS) should be visible on the stern of the carrier. A steady amber
light means you are aligned with the angled deck for landing. A green light means you are lined up right and a
red light means you are lined up left.
The red and green lights flash at different rates to show how far off centerline you are. Slow flashing means you
are slightly off centerline while fast flashing means you are far off centerline.
ACLS Lock
At 6-8 miles the approach controller will report:
“[SIDE NUMBER] final radar contact, [DISTANCE TO CARRIER] miles.”


You will acknowledge with:
“[SIDE NUMBER].”


At around 6 nm, aircraft equipped with the Automated Carrier Landing System will acquire ACLS lock. Approach
will then ask pilot to “say needles” to check ACLS alignment. Pilot responds by reporting how the aircraft must
be flown to be centered. That is, if the aircraft is low and left the pilot responds, “up and right.”


At ACLS lock on, the approach controller will transmit:
[SIDE NUMBER], ACLS lock on [DISTANCE TO CARRIER] miles, say needles.


You will reply automatically with:
[SIDE NUMBER], [GLIDEPATH] [LOCALIZER].
This is reference to the position of the ACLS circle on the HUD in relation to the velocity vector on the HUD. For
example:
If ACLS circle is below and to the right of the velocity vector, the message would be: “305, down and right.”
If ACLS circle is above and to the left of the velocity vector, the message would be: “305, up and left.”
If ACLS circle is level and to the right of the velocity vector, the message would be: “305, on and right.”
If ACLS circle is over the velocity vector, the message would be: “305, on and on.”


Approach will respond with:
“[SIDE NUMBER], Concur, Fly Mode 2.”


Approach will advise when you are approaching the final glidepath, usually at 4 miles:
“[SIDE NUMBER], approaching glidepath.”


You acknowledge with:
[SIDE NUMBER].
In the Groove
At ¾ nm, the approach controller directs the pilot to “call the ball” with:
“[SIDE NDUMBER], [GLIDEPATH LOCATION], [COURSE LOCATION], ¾ mile, call the ball.”


From the ATC carrier menu, you will select ‘BALL’. Upon doing so, the following message will be transmitted:
“[SIDE NUMBER], [AIRCRAFT TYPE] BALL, [FUEL STATE].”


Approach acknowledges:
“Roger ball, [WIND OVER DECK SPEED], [OPTIONAL DIRECTION].”


For example:
If the wind over the deck speed is 25 knots and the wind direction is coming from greater than 5-degrees to the
right of the landing deck angle: “Roger ball, 25 knots, starboard.”
If the wind over the deck speed is 25 knots and the wind direction is coming from greater than 5-degrees to the
left of the landing deck angle: “Roger ball, 25 knots, port.”
If the wind over the deck speed is 25 knots and the wind direction is coming from greater than 3-degrees to the
right of the landing deck angle: “Roger ball, 25 knots, axial.”


This phase will be flown based on the state of the IFLOLS ball and verbal directions from the LSO.




The LSO may make these calls if your aircraft is not configured for landing:
“Wave off, gear” – Your landing gear is not extended.
“Wave off, flaps” – Your flaps are not configured for landing.
Clara
If you do not have the ball in sight, select ‘CLARA’ from the ATC menu. The LSO will provide the following calls
to get you on glidepath if necessary:
“You’re high” – You are far above the glidepath.
“You’re low, POWER” – You are far below the glidepath.
If you are still not within glidepath limits at ½ mile astern of the carrier the LSO will transmit “Wave off, wave
off, wave off”. The IFLOLS waveoff lights will also flash red.
‘Clara’ may be transmitted automatically in some cases when you greatly exceed glidepath limits. “Ball” will be
automatically transmitted once you are back within glidepath limits. The LSO will respond with “Roger ball”.
Inside ¾ Mile
When inside ¾ mile and the ball call has been made, direction from the LSO is based on your deviation from
localizer centerline and 3.5-degree glidepath.




     •     No direction = under 1.7 degrees left or right of localizer and less than 1.5 degrees below and less
           than 2.5 degrees above optimal glidepath
     •     Off centerline = greater than 1.7 degrees left or right of optimal localizer centerline
     •     Off glidepath = greater than 1.5 degrees below and greater than 2.5 degrees above optimal glidepath
     •     Far off centerline = greater than 2.9 degrees left or right of optimal localizer centerline
     •     Far off glidepath = 2.7 degrees or greater below or 4.9 degrees or greater above optimal glidepath


“You’re high” – Aircraft is far above the glidepath.
“You’re low, POWER” – Aircraft is far below the glidepath.
“You’re lined up left” – Aircraft is far left of centerline.
“You’re lined up right” – Aircraft is far right of centerline.
“You’re fast” – Angle of attack is too low.
“You’re slow” – Angle of attack is too high.
“Easy with the nose” – Aircraft has excessive pitch rate. (>5 degrees per second)
“Easy with your wings” – Aircraft has excessive roll angle. (>20 degrees)
“Easy with it” – Aircraft thrust changes are excessive. (>30% per second)
Inside ½ Mile
As you approach the carrier’s stern, direction from the LSO becomes more precise.


“You’re high” or “You’re high, bring it down” or “You’re high, work it down.” – Aircraft is above glideslope
more than 3 seconds.
“Power” (normal inflection) – Aircraft is below glideslope more than two seconds or aircraft on glideslope but is
descending more than 1 degree per second for 2 seconds. If same call is made 2 seconds later: “Power” with
more urgent inflection.
“power, Power, POWER” – Aircraft is far below glidepath and sinking rapidly.
“Easy with it” – Greater than 1 degree per second change in glidepath following a “power” call.
“Right for lineup” – Aircraft is left of centerline.
“Come left” – Aircraft is right of centerline.
“Wave off, wave off, wave off” – Two or more of the above conditions are true at the same time for a 2
second or more duration or excessive glidepath and localizer deviation for more than 4 seconds.
“Wave off, wave off, wave off, foul deck” – Another aircraft is in the landing area
“Bolter, bolter, bolter” – Aircraft wheels touch and tailhook misses arresting cables.
Landing
Do not anticipate an arrested landing. When the aircraft touches down, advance the power to max and retract
the speed brakes in anticipation of a bolter. Maintain max power until the aircraft comes to a complete stop.
Then, release the brakes and allow the aircraft to be pulled back. The arresting wire will release from the hook
and you will be free to taxi to a parking location.




The LSO will grade each landing and display the results at the top right of your screen. The format is [GRADE]:
[MAIN ERRORS], [ERROR LOCATION], [WIRE CAUGHT].
A typical landing grade may look like this:



Transcription: “No grade. Drifted way right in close. Landed a little left in the wires. Caught number 4 wire.”
Grades:
     •    WO - Waveoff
     •    OWO - Own Waveoff
     •    _OK_ - Perfect pass
     •    OK - Reasonable deviations with good corrections
     •    (OK) - Fair. Reasonable deviations
     •    --- - No-grade. Below average but safe pass
     •    C - Cut. Unsafe, gross deviations inside waveoff window
     •    B - Bolter


Main errors:
     •    AFU - All “fouled” up
     •    DL - Drifted left
     •    DR - Drifted right
     •    EG - Eased gun (pulled throttles back to help set the hook for arrestment)
     •    F - Fast
     •    FD - Fouled deck
     •    H - High
     •    LL - Landed left
     •    LO - Low
     •    LR - Landed right
     •    LUL - Lined up left
     •    LUR - Lined up right
     •    N - Nose
     •    NERD - Not enough rate of descent
     •    NSU - Not set up
     •    P - Power
     •    SLO – Slow
     •    TMRD – Too much rate of descent
     •    W - Wings
     •    LLWD - Landed left wing down
     •    LRWD - Landed right wing down
     •    LNF - Landed nose
     •    3PTS - Landed 3 points


Distance marks placed after error:
     •    BC - Ball call (before first 1/3 of glideslope)
     •    X - At the start (first 1/3 of glideslope)
     •    IM - In the middle (middle 1/3 of the glideslope)
     •    IC - In close (last 1/3 of glideslope)
     •    AR - At the ramp
     •    TL - To land (between AR and first wire)
     •    IW - In the wires
     •    AW – After wires


Note 1: Parentheses ( ) around any symbol signifies “a little” (e.g., "(F)" means “a little fast”)
Note 2: Underline. For emphasis (e.g."_H_" means “very high”)
Note 3: A square [ ] around any symbol indicates that a signal was not answered (e.g. “[BC]” means no ball call
has been made)


After landing, you have the option to taxi to a catapult and take off again immediately. To do so, alert the ground
crew by selecting ‘Request Launch’ from the ground crew communications menu. The catapult crew will be
ready to hook you up at whatever catapult you taxi to.
Waveoff or Bolter
In the event of a waveoff or bolter, climb to 1,200 feet at 150 kts and raise the gear to save fuel, leaving flaps
down. When instructed by approach, turn downwind. Perform the landing checks on downwind and notify
approach with fuel state when abeam the ship. Expect a turn back to final 4-8 NM past abeam for another
approach, lowering the landing gear as you start this turn to final.
LANDING SIGNAL OFFICER (LSO) STATION
Overview
The DCS: Supercarrier module includes a fully functional Landing Signal Officer (LSO) station for directing
players in a multiplayer setting or observing aircraft in a single player setting.
You may enter the LSO station with keyboard command [LALT+F9].
You will be transported to the LSO position with the LSO workstation console in front of you. A separate Pilot's
Landing Aid Television (PLAT) Camera view will be opened in a separate window. This will be referred to here
as the LSO Main Screen Window.




  LSO Main Screen
  Window




                                                                                                LSO Workstation




You may look around using standard DCS view controls. Use keyboard command [LALT+C] to enable the
mouse cursor and interact with the LSO Main Screen window.
LSO Main Screen Window
The LSO Main Screen window shows a live view from the PLAT camera surrounded by additional information
on ship and aircraft status. You may open and close the window by clicking the top left. You may also reposition
the window by clicking and dragging it to a new location.
The view may be scrolled up and down using your mouse wheel or by clicking and dragging the bar at the right
side. The full LSO Main Screen is displayed at the top and a PLAT Camera view is displayed at the bottom.
This information is also available on the physical LSO consoles.




LSO Main Screen




PLAT Camera View
LSO Main Screen Display
The Main screen display shows information used to calibrate the IFLOLS optical landing system for the aircraft
on approach. The data displayed here ensures the glidepath information presented to the pilot is accurate.
The PLAT camera view is also shown in the center of the display. Details on this will be shown in the next
section.


                                                                                                    Deck Status


                                                                                                    Landing Queue
      Ship Symbol
                                                                                                     Ship Heading
    ACLS Closure



Ship List and Trim




                                                                                                     Hook to Ramp
   Aircraft Type




                                                                                                    Hook Touchdown




Ship Symbol. In the center of the ship symbol is the wind over deck speed in knots. If the axial wind is from the
left, P will be displayed to the left of the symbol it will indicate the wind speed and P (port). If the axial wind is
from the right, S will be displayed to the right of the symbol and it will indicate wind speed and S (starboard). If
there is less than 1 knot axial, this is not displayed.
ACLS Closure. If the active aircraft is using ACLS to land, this will display the closure of the aircraft to the ship
in knots.
Ship List and Trim. The top indication displays the real time list (roll) of the ship in degrees. Right of the X.X
value, it will display either STBD UP or STBD DOWN (starboard up and down). Trim works the same except the
real time trim (pitch) of the ship is displayed.
Aircraft Type. The aircraft next for landing is listed here. The H/E (hook to eye) distance is the number of feet
above the tailhook the pilot’s eyes are. This is used to calibrate the IFLOLS ball to be accurate for each aircraft
type. The B/A (basic angle) is the glidepath angle the crosshairs in the camera display are aligned to.
Deck Status. If there is an aircraft or deck crew in the landing area, this will show FOUL. If the area is clear, it
will display CLEAR.
Ship Heading. This shows the ships magnetic heading which is the same as the Base Recovery Course (BRC)
value in degrees.
Landing Queue. The next three aircraft in queue to land are listed here, with the next aircraft to land in the top
box. Each aircraft is listed by side number.
Hook Touch Down. This indicates the distance from the stern of the ship at which the IFLOLS landing system
directs the pilot to fly such that the hook will strike the indicated location. For a 3-wire, it should be 230 feet. The
four dots indicate the four arresting wires. The selected wire to capture is solid. The thick tick mark indicates the
exact, desired hook touch down point and the caret above is the dynamic point based on pitch up and down. As
the ship’s bow moves up and down, so will this caret.
Hook to Ramp. This vertical scale illustrates the desired height the bottom of the arresting hook should be
when it crosses over the stern of the ship. For a 3-wire, it should be 14.1 feet. The thick tick mark indicates the
desired hook over ramp height and the caret is the dynamic indication of hook to ramp based on the ship
pitching up and down.
PLAT Camera View
The center of the window shows the view from the PLAT camera. The camera is mounted on the deck and
angled up at 3-degrees along the aircraft landing glideslope to the arrestor wires. Information is superimposed
over the image to aid in LSO duties.


                                                                                                 Deck Status
             Date
                                                                                                 Carrier Number
        Local Time




                                                                                                 Wind Over Deck


       Crosshairs




 Waveoff Indicator
 (not shown)
                                                                                                 Distance


                                                                                                  Descent Rate
        Airspeed




Date. The current date.
Local Time. The current local time.
Crosshairs. These show the proper glideslope and azimuth for arriving aircraft.
Waveoff Indicator. A flashing ‘W’ for waveoff will be shown when if the deck is not clear or other conditions for
a waveoff are met.
Airspeed. True airspeed in knots is displayed if the aircraft is ACLS equipped. Otherwise, all zeros are
displayed.
Deck Status. This is the readiness state of the landing area. A ‘C’ means the deck clear and the aircraft on
approach may land safely. A flashing ‘F’ means the deck is foul and the aircraft’s landing zone is obstructed.
Carrier Number. This is the hull number of the carrier, in this case CVN 71.
Wind Over Deck. This is the wind over deck in knots, accounting for both wind speed and ship speed.
Distance: The distance between the carrier and the aircraft is displayed in feet if the aircraft is ACLS equipped.
Otherwise, all zeros are displayed.
Descent Rate: The rate of descent in feet per second is displayed if the aircraft is ACLS equipped. Otherwise,
all zeros are displayed.
MISSION EDITOR FEATURES
Overview
The DCS: Supercarrier module uses the standard mission editor interface. A complete explanation may be
found in the DCS: World User Manual located in your DCS World/Docs folder. That should be your first stop
when learning to set up missions using these assets.




In this section, we will briefly highlight some key features it is important to understand when setting up a mission
with the Supercarrier.
Ship Selection and Placement
The new ship assets included with the Supercarrier module appear in the TYPE dropdown list. The new Nimitz
Class carriers and Arleigh Burke destroyer are available when the COUNTRY is set to USA. The Admiral
Kuznetsov carrier is available with the COUNTRY set to Russia.
Note that the CVN-70 Carl Vinson and CVN-74 John C. Stennis are the original carrier assets included with
DCS: World. They are still available for users who do not own the Supercarrier module.




                                 Wind Direction




It is best to face the carrier into the wind on launch and recovery to eliminate crosswind and reduce the
airspeed required to keep aircraft airborne. The carrier’s speed should be set so that the wind over deck (ship
speed plus wind speed) is near 30 knots.
It is important to remember the ship’s course in the mission editor is its true heading while Base Recovery
Course (BRC) used in carrier operations is magnetic heading. To get the BRC, add or subtract the magnetic
variation for the map being used or simply note the BRC shown at the LSO station in the mission.
Communications and Navigation Equipment
The radio frequency and NAVAID channels are all set in the mission editor. See the first section of this guide for
a description of each system. See the specific aircraft manual for exact system operation in the air and any
restrictions that may apply while setting them up on the carrier.



Radio Frequency
The ship’s ATC radio frequency and modulation are set by typing in the desired frequency or selecting the
desired modulation (AM/FM) from the dropdown menu.
All radio functions for the carrier (i.e. Marshal, Approach, Tower, and LSO) will use this single frequency. The
channel presets for the aircraft used in the mission should be set to match.
TACAN Channel
The carrier’s TACAN beacon must be activated by adding an advanced waypoint action. This is usually set at
waypoint 0, the ship’s starting location.
In this example, TACAN channel and band 71X is used. The callsign is set to TDR. A morse code signal will be
audible keying out those letters for identification. This identifier will also be shown on the aircraft’s displays
where applicable.
You must also select the unit within the group the TACAN signal will originate from. This should always be the
carrier. Note that the carrier’s unit name was changed to CVN-71 to make it easier to identify in the list.
ICLS Channel
The carrier’s ICLS channel is set by adding an advanced waypoint action in the same way as TACAN.
In this example, channel 11 will be used. Compatible aircraft will receive ICLS guidance on that channel. The
originating unit is selected as CVN-71.
AI Aircraft Parking and Taxi Logic
At mission start, there are 20 possible aircraft spawn locations available: the 16 parking locations listed below
and 1 on each catapult. Aircraft assigned "Takeoff from ramp" or "Takeoff from parking hot" in the mission editor
will spawn in one of the 16 parking locations listed based on the sequence it was added to the carrier. In a
multiplayer mission, parking spots are assigned based on when a client joins the server.
Aircraft assigned "Takeoff from runway hot" in the mission editor will spawn on the catapult specified in the
mission editor by the mission designer.
The number of available parking locations is reduced when a multiplayer server is un-paused. Spots 1-4 are
deactivated to clear the taxi route for other launching and recovering aircraft, leaving 16 possible spawn
locations: the 12 remaining parking locations and the four catapults.
The parking layout for small aircraft like the F/A-18C Hornet is shown below. This layout is also applies to the S-
3 Viking and E-2 Hawkeye support aircraft, except spots 1-4 are not used. The support aircraft are usually
airborne first so consider starting those either on a catapult or on spots 5-8.




The F-14 Tomcat is a larger aircraft and requires more ramp space. One parking spot on each of the elevators
and one spot on the stern is not available with an F-14 parked on the adjacent spot. Plan your launch sequence
accordingly, remembering aircraft occupy parking spots in the order they are added to the carrier. Those
unoccupied spots will become available again after aircraft begin to taxi clear.




Aircraft that cannot fit on the flight deck are stored below on the hangar deck until a suitable parking spot is free.
In a multiplayer setting, this may result in a ‘your flight is delayed to start - please wait’ message until space is
available.
When an aircraft lands, it requests a taxi route to exit the landing area. Deck control will search for an open
parking location by priority order listed below and provide a taxi route to it. First, it determines a free location
based on the maximum number of open parking locations. For example, if the parking spot aft of the island is
occupied, the next parking spot in priority order will be selected. Next, deck control will check that the chosen
parking location is suitable for the landing aircraft type and that there are no taxi route obstructions like other
“live” aircraft or static objects. Once these requirements are satisfied, the landing aircraft is routed to the open,
unobstructed parking location.




Aircraft like the F/A-18C Hornet, S-3 Viking and E-2 Hawkeye have a small deck footprint and will use any of
the available parking spots shown above. Large aircraft like the F-14 Tomcat may not be able to use some
parking spots or may prevent other aircraft from parking in the adjacent spots. For this reason, it is a good
practice to maintain an unobstructed path to elevator 1 and 2, forward of the carrier’s island structure. Aircraft
reaching those locations will be transported to the hangar deck below and help keep the deck clear.
If, however, a mission is constructed the prohibits landing aircraft from reaching a parking location, the aircraft
will be automatically removed from the simulation after landing.
Static Object Placement
A number of new static objects are included with the Supercarrier module that allow you to add more life to the
carrier deck, above and beyond the launch crews that are already present by default.
The new static objects are available under the headings ‘Airfield and Deck Equipment’ and ‘Personnel’. Of
course, all aircraft and other static objects included with DCS: World are compatible and may be used.




Before starting, you should depress the unit icon at the bottom of the mission editor screen. Enabling this option
will show the shape of the shape of all objects in the mission editor viewer. This allows placement of objects
with much more precision. Then, zoom in so the carrier deck is visible.
When an object is placed on the deck, it must be linked to the carrier. Select the carrier from the LINK UNIT
dropdown. Once this are set, the static object will be linked to the carrier and remain in position as it moves.




You may find it helpful to add additional objects by copying and pasting an object that is already linked to the
carrier, so you do not have to perform this step every time. You may do this by selecting the object, CTRL+C to
copy, then CTRL+V to paste.
It is important not to place static objects in locations they may interfere with flight operations so test your
mission thoroughly to find any problems. To assist with this, visual aids showing suitable locations on the deck
are included below.
                     Static
 Launch              Object       Recovery
Operations                        Operations
                      Safe
   4                 Zones           4
 Aircraft                          Aircraft




             1

             2


             3


                 4




                              4
                             Static
 Launch                      Object               Recovery
Operations                                        Operations
                              Safe
   8                         Zones                   8
 Aircraft                                          Aircraft




                 1

                 2


                 3       5

                         6
                     4
                                      8


                                      7

                                          6

                                              5
             7
                                              4
             8
                               Static
 Launch                        Object                    Recovery
Operations                                               Operations
                                Safe
  16                           Zones                       16
 Aircraft                                                 Aircraft




                                                    10

                                                    11

                         11                    All
                                            Remaining
                 1       12

                 2       13                     9


                 3        5                    All
                                            Remaining
                          6
                     4
                                        8


                                        7

                                            6

                          9                         5
             7
                          10                        4
             8
GLOSSARY
Air Boss: Officer in charge of all flight deck and tower operations within 5 nautical miles of the ship. Located in
Pri-Fly.
Angels: Altitude in thousands of feet. For example, Angels 3 = 3,000 feet.
Axial Winds: Winds down the longitudinal axis of the ship created by the ship’s forward movement. This
causes a right-to-left crosswind across the angled deck.
Ball: Light projected by source lens on the IFLOLS. Also referred to as “Meatball.”
Bingo Fuel: Aircraft fuel state in sufficient quantity necessary to fly to the bingo airfield or carrier with X lbs.
remaining, depending on aircraft type.
Bolter: A touchdown on the carrier in which the arresting hook does not engage the arresting wires.
BRC: Base recovery course, which is the ship’s magnetic course.
Buster: Proceed at maximum airspeed.
Carrier Air Traffic Control Center (CATCC): The centralized department responsible for the status-keeping of
all carrier air operations and control of all airborne aircraft involved in launch and recovery.
Carrier Control Zone (CCZ): The airspace within a circular limit defined by a 5 mile radius around the ship
surface up to and including 2,500 feet under the control of the Air Boss during visual; flight rules conditions.
Case I: Refers to departure/recovery procedures and landing patterns conducted in visual conditions when
greater than 3,000-foot ceiling and 5 nautical mile visibility exists within the carrier control zone. Case I
recoveries will marshal overhead the ship and enter the pattern via the break.
Case II: Case II recovery occurs during daylight hours when conditions may be poor on the approach but
adequate for landing under visual flight rules. The cloud ceiling must be above 1,000 feet and visibility more
than 5 nm. Case II recovery is a controlled descent to the break and the pattern. It is used when a visual
penetration cannot be made. The approach may be via radar vectors or a TACAN or ADF approach. In no case
will more than a section of two aircraft execute a Case II recovery. Case II departure is a procedure used to
climb through instrument conditions to visual conditions.
Case III: Used for weather less than 1,000/5, or at night.
CCA: Carrier-controlled approach.
Charlie: Refers to the time the first aircraft is expected at the ramp. A “Charlie” call is a directive to enter the
landing pattern.
Chicks: Wingmen in a flight.
Clara: Meatball is not in sight.
Clearing Turn: Associated with a Case I or II departure. Immediately after launch, aircraft from bow cats initiate
a right turn then a turn to parallel the BRC. Aircraft launched from the waist cats initiate a left turn then a turn to
parallel the BRC. The purpose of these turns is to provide aircraft lateral separation on multiple launches from
the carrier.
Cross-Deck Pendant (CDP): Arresting gear wire
Cut Lights: Green lights mounted horizontally and centered above the IFLOLS lens box and are controlled by
the LSO. Utilized during Zip Lip and EMCON conditions instead of UHF to give pilots clearance to land, i.e.,
“Roger Ball.” Subsequent cut lights mean “power.” Also, used in conjunction with waveoff lights to signal bingo.
Datum Lights: Green reference lights mounted horizontally on the IFLOLS, seen on each side of the centered
cell.
Departure Reference Radial (DRR): Preassigned radial usually passed during the brief or as standard
operating procedure.
Emission Control Procedures (EMCON): Electronic emission control procedures are in effect at the ship to
avoid detection. All radio, radar, and navigation equipment transmissions are eliminated except as required for
safety of flight.
Expected Approach Time (EAT): The future time at which an aircraft is cleared to depart inbound or penetrate
from a pre-assigned fix. Aircraft depart and commence approach at assigned time if no further instructions are
received.
Father: Code name for the ship’s TACAN.
Feet Wet or Feet Dry: Aircraft crossing the coastline enroute to or returning from the ship.
Final Bearing (FB): The magnetic bearing assigned by CATCC for final approach (an extension of the landing
area centerline); usually BRC minus the landing area angle of 10°.
Foul Deck: Landing area is not free of all obstructions or the flight deck is not ready to recover aircraft.
Foul Line: A line painted on both sides of the landing area to define the minimum area that must be free of
obstructions in order to consider the deck clear.
Hangar Deck: Area below the flight deck used to store and repair aircraft.
Holdback: Metal fitting designed to break or release at a preset level of force during a catapult stroke.
Hook to Eye: The vertical distance measured between the pilot’s eye and the aircraft’s hook.
Hook to Ramp: The clearance distance between the aircraft’s hook point and the flight deck as it crosses the
ramp.
Improved Fresnel Lens Optical Landing System (IFLOLS): Pilot’s landing aid, i.e., meatball.
Interval: The time between you and the aircraft you are to follow.
In the Middle Position: A distance on the groove that is between the “start” and the “in close” position. The
middle-third of the groove.
Jet Blast Deflector (JBD): Hydraulically lifted deck plate mounted behind each catapult.
Landing Signals Officer (LSO). Controls all fixed-wing aircraft on final approach, or ‘in the groove’ during
carrier landings.
Launch Bar: Metal arm attached to the nose gear and used to launch the aircraft.
Mark your Father: State bearing and distance from ship.
Marshal: Holding pattern during Case I, II, and III recoveries. Also the term used for the ship’s radar controller.
Mother: Code name used to signify the carrier.
Overhead Time: The scheduled time a flight of aircraft is expected overhead the ship for pattern entry.
Paddles: The call sign for the LSO.
Pilot Landing Assistance Television (PLAT): Video camera system used to record carrier operations.
Plane Guard: SAR helicopter or ship assigned during aircraft launch and recovery, usually located in starboard
Delta for a helicopter, three miles astern for a ship.
Platform: A reporting point in the ship’s TACAN approach (normally at 20 NM from the ship at 5,000 feet) at
which the rate of descent is decreased to 2,000 feet per minute.
Popeye: Code word used to signify that aircraft is operating on instruments in poor weather or low visibility.
Pri-Fly: Tower location where the Air Boss oversees the pattern and flight deck operations.
Pull Back: Action following arrestment whereby the wire is partially retracted to allow the pilot to raise the
tailhook.
Push Back: Action taken anytime the aircraft needs to be moved back by deck personnel.
Ramp: The aft end of the flight deck.
Roger Ball: The call made by the LSO that indicates you are cleared to land and the LSO has positive control
(call made less than a mile prior to landing).
Roll Angle: Movement of the lens about the roll axis (set for each type of aircraft) to maintain a constant
targeted hook touchdown point.
RTB: Signal to return to base.
See You: Communication used to indicate that flight lead has the ship in sight.
Shuttle: The portion of the catapult that attaches to the launch bar during catapult launches.
Starboard Delta: Holding pattern used by the helicopters and COD aircraft flown on the starboard side of the
ship and using right-hand turns at 500 feet.
Start: The first-third of the groove length.
Suspend: Stop the catapult launch sequence.
Sweet Lock: Positive TACAN lock-on.
Tension: The portion of the catapult launch sequence when the shuttle is hydraulically moved forward to
remove slack.
Tiedown: Chocks and chains used to secure aircraft on the flight deck.
Zip Lip: Condition in which radio communications are minimized.
Good hunting!
The Eagle Dynamics SA team
EAGLE DYNAMICS SA © 2020
